--- PAGE 1 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
2026 - 2027
Game Manual
Version 0.1

--- PAGE 2 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Prefix
Changelog ................................................................................iv
Quick Reference Guide  .........................................................v
 
Section 1 - Introduction
 
Section 2 - The Game
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override: A Primer  ....8
Game Design Philosophy - A Letter from the GDC  .13
Scoring  .....................................................................................15
Specific Game Rules ...........................................................20
Safety Rules  ...........................................................................26
General Rules  ........................................................................27
General Game Rules  ...........................................................33
 
Section 3 - Robot Skills
Robot Skills Challenge Rules  ...........................................42
 
Section 4 - The Robot
Inspection Rules  ...................................................................47
 
Section 5 - The Tournament
Tournament Rules  ................................................................61
Table of Contents

--- PAGE 3 ---

iii
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Section 6 - VEX U
Game, Robot, and Tournament Rules ...........................75
VURC Definitions ..................................................................75
Rule Modifications: Field Setup ......................................76
Rule Modifications: Game .................................................76
Rule Modifications: Robot Skills Challenge ................77
Rule Modifications: Tournament ....................................79
Rule Modifications: Robot .................................................80
Team Composition ..............................................................87
 
Appendix A - Field Overview
Game Field Introduction ...................................................A2
Field Overview ...................................................................... A2
Game Objects & Field Bill of Materials ........................ A3
Field Specifications Introduction ..................................A4
 
Appendix B - Glossary of Terms
 
Appendix C - Rule Violations
 
Appendix D - Team Classifications and Student Roles

--- PAGE 4 ---

iv
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Version 0.1 - April 27, 2026
 ● Initial release
Changelog
Prefix

--- PAGE 5 ---

v
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Scoring Rules
<SC1> All scoring statuses are evaluated after the Match ends
<SC2> Placed Pin criteria
<SC3> Each Placed Pin can have one or two scored halves
<SC4> A Toggle is considered set to a color when it meets all of the following criteria
<SC5> Each Pin with one or more yellow halves scored can be Owned by an Alliance
<SC6> Robot Midfield criteria
<SC7> Autonomous Bonus criteria
<SC8> Autonomous Win Point criteria
Specific Game Rules
<SG1> Starting a Match
<SG2> Horizontal expansion is limited
<SG3> Vertical expansion is limited
<SG4> Keep Scoring Objects in the Field
<SG5> Each Robot gets one Pin as a Preload
<SG6> Possession is limited to a maximum of one Pin and one Cup
<SG7> Don’t cross the Autonomous Line, and don’t interfere with your opponents’ actions
<SG8> Engage with the Midfield and Autonomous Line during the Autonomous Period at your own risk
<SG9> Alliance Goals are protected
<SG10> Scoring Objects can’t be removed from neutral or opponent- Alliance Goals
<SG11> Match Loads may be introduced during the Match under certain conditions
<SG12> Some rules change during the Endgame period
Safety Rules
<S1> Be safe out there
<S2> Students must be accompanied by an Adult
<S3> Each Student Team member must have a completed participant release form on file
<S4> Stay inside the Field
<S5> Wear safety glasses
General Rules
<G1> Treat everyone with respect
<G2> V5RC is a Student-centered program
<G3> Use common sense
<G4> All work must represent the skill level of the Students on the Team
<G5> Each Student can only belong to one Team
<G6> There is a difference between accidentally and willfully violating a Robot rule
Quick Reference Guide

--- PAGE 6 ---

vi
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
General Game Rules
<GG1> Only Drive Team Members, and only in the Alliance Station
<GG2> A Team’s Robot should attend every Match
<GG3> Robots on the Field must be ready to play
<GG4> Hands out of the Field
<GG5> Match replays are allowed, but rare
<GG6> Disqualifications
<GG7> Time-outs
<GG8> Keep your Robots together
<GG9> Don’t hook your Robot to the Field, and don’t get Entangled
<GG10> The red Alliance may choose to place last
<GG11> Controllers must stay connected to the Field
<GG12> Autonomous means “no humans”
<GG13> All rules still apply in the Autonomous Period
<GG14> Don’t destroy other Robots. But, be prepared to encounter defense
<GG15> Offensive Robots get the “benefit of the doubt” when judgment calls are required
<GG16> You can’t force an opponent into a penalty
<GG17> No Holding for more than a 3-count
<GG18> Use Scoring Objects to play the game
Robot Skills Challenge Rules
<RSC1> Standard rules apply in most cases
<RSC2> Match play is different in Robot Skills Matches
<RSC3> Scoring Robot Skills Matches
<RSC4> Field setup for Robot Skills Matches
<RSC5> Skills Stop Time
Inspection Rules
<R1> One Robot per Team
<R2> Robots must pass inspection
<R3> Robots must fit within an 18” x 18” x 18” volume
<R4> Officially registered Team numbers must be displayed on Robot License Plates
<R5> Let go of Scoring Objects after the Match
<R6> Robots have one Brain
<R7> Keep the power button or battery connection accessible
<R8> Firmware
<R9> Use a “Competition Template” for programming
<R10> Motors are limited
<R11> Subsystem 1 has a motor limit

--- PAGE 7 ---

vii
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<R12> Electrical power comes from VEX batteries only
<R13> Robots use VEXnet
<R14> Give the radio some space
<R15> One or two Controllers per Robot
<R16> Robots are built from the VEX V5 system
<R17> New VEX parts are legal
<R18> Prohibited Items
<R19> Certain non-VEX components are allowed
<R20> Custom V5 Smart Cables are allowed
<R21> A limited amount of tape is allowed
<R22> Certain non-VEX fasteners are allowed
<R23> Visual decorations are allowed
<R24> A limited amount of custom plastic is allowed
<R25> Pneumatics are limited
<R26> The VEX Pressure Gauge is a required part if a Robot includes pneumatics
<R27> Most modifications to non-electrical components are allowed
<R28> No modifications to electronic or pneumatic components are allowed
Tournament Rules
<T1> Head Referees have ultimate and final authority on all gameplay and Robot ruling decisions
<T2> Head Referees must be qualified
<T3> Drive Team Members are permitted to immediately appeal a Head Referee’s ruling
<T4> The Event Partner has ultimate authority regarding all non-gameplay decisions
<T5> Be prepared for minor Field variance
<T6> Fields may be repaired at the Event Partner’s discretion
<T7> Fields at an event must be consistent with each other
<T8> There are three types of Field control that may be used
<T9> There are two types of Field Perimeter that may be used
<T10> Qualification Matches  follow the Match Schedule
<T11> Each Team will have at least six Qualification Matches
<T12> Qualification Matches  contribute to a Team’s ranking for Alliance Selection
<T13> Qualification Matches  tiebreakers
<T14> Small Tournaments have fewer Alliances
<T15> Send a Student representative to Alliance Selection
<T16> Each Team may only be invited once to join one Alliance
<T17> Elimination Matches  follow the Elimination Bracket
<T18> Elimination Matches  are a blend of “Best of 1” and “Best of 3”
<T19> Ties in Elimination Matches  lead to limited rematches
<T20> Skills Match Schedule

--- PAGE 8 ---

viii
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<T21> Skills Challenge Fields do not require the same modifications as the Head-to-Head Fields
<T22> Skills Rankings at events
<T23> Skills Rankings globally
<T24> Robot Skills at League Events
VEX U Game Rules
<VUG1> Different Robot starting sizes
<VUG2> Different Robot placement than rule <GG10>
<VUG3> Some electronic devices may be in motion or moving at the beginning of the Match
<VUG4> Different availability of Loaders
<VUG5> Different scoring during the Autonomous Period
<VUG6> Different Autonomous Win Point criteria
<VUG7> Different expansion in the Midfield during the Endgame period
VEX U Robot Skills Challenge Rules
<VURS1> VEX U Robot Skills Matches are set up differently than V5RC Robot Skills Matches
<VURS2> Teams are permitted to use both Robots in their VEX U Robot Skills Matches
<VURS3> Both Robots must start the Robot Skills Match in legal starting positions for the red Alliance
VEX U Tournament Rules
<VUT1> VURC Head-to-Head Matches will be played 1-Team vs. 1-Team
<VUT2> Qualification Matches  will be conducted in the same manner as in a V5RC Tournament
<VUT3> Elimination Matches  will be conducted in the same manner, but without an Alliance Selection
<VUT4> The Autonomous Period at the beginning of each Head-to-Head Match will be 30 seconds
<VUT5> The Driver Controlled Period is shortened to 90 seconds
<VUT6> VEX U Student eligibility
<VUT7> VURC Tournaments have fewer Teams in Elimination Matches
VEX U Robot Rules
<VUR1> Teams may use two (2) Robots in each Match
<VUR2> Teams may use any official VEX Robotics products, other than the exceptions listed below
<VUR3> Fabricated Parts may be made by applying the following processes to Raw Stock
<VUR4> Fabricated Parts must be made from legal Raw Stock
<VUR5> The following material types are not considered Raw Stock
<VUR6> Fabricated Parts cannot be made from Raw Stock which poses a safety or damage risk
<VUR7> Fabricated Parts must be made by Team members
<VUR8> Teams may use commercially-available springs on their Robots
<VUR9> Teams may use commercially available fastener hardware on their Robot
<VUR10> Each Robot must utilize exactly one (1) V5 Robot Brain and at least one (1) V5 Robot Radio

--- PAGE 9 ---

ix
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<VUR11> There is no restriction on the number of V5 Smart Motors
<VUR12> There is no restriction on Sensors, External Processors, or Additional Electronics
<VUR13> Commercially available Electromechanical Assemblies  are not legal
<VUR14> Teams may utilize an unlimited amount of the following pneumatic components
<VUR15> Teams may use commercially available bearings on their Robot

--- PAGE 10 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Section 1
Introduction

--- PAGE 11 ---

2
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
About the Game Manual
Section 1 - Introduction
The VEX V5 Robotics Competition Game Manual is the most authoritative source of information for the VEX 
V5 Robotics Competition. Contained within this document are all of the rules, boundaries, constraints, and 
other relevant information you will need to properly understand and play this year’s game. 
 
This manual is:
 ● A technical reference document for gameplay, Robot construction, and event operation
 ● A binding set of rules for Teams, coaches, referees, Event Partners, and all other volunteers and 
participants to adhere to
 ● The primary source of truth for all things related to the VEX V5 Robotics Competition  
This manual is not:
 ● A strategy guide to score the most points
 ● An instruction set to build the best Robot
 ● A replacement for referee training, Event Partner training, or other event procedure
How to Read the Game Manual
The rules in this game manual are intended to work together to create a system of constraints. These rules 
are not intended to be understood independently of one another or in isolation from other information con -
tained in this document. Many situations may require Teams, referees, or other volunteers to use logic from 
multiple places in the manual to properly form an interpretation. It is critical that the entire manual is read and 
understood, not just parts.
Information in the game manual is presented in the following ways:
Definitions in Appendix B establish the meaning of a term with regards to this document. Sometimes, these 
definitions may not perfectly match a more commonly accepted dictionary definition. In that case, the VEX 
definition takes precedence. If there is no VEX definition for a term, it can be reasonably assumed that a 
dictionary definition can be used.
General Rules establish the baseline rules for competition that Teams must adhere to at all times. These 
include, but are not limited to, conduct at an event, roster eligibility, competition integrity, and authority and 
enforcement. 
General Game Rules  begin to outline the rules that Teams must follow in every VEX game, not just the rules 
specific to this season’s game. Many of these rules do not change from year to year, and help prevent the 
game from devolving into immediate chaos. 
Scoring Rules define how points are earned and evaluated.
Specific Game Rules  describe what Robots and Drive Team Members may and may not do during a Match, 
specifically for this season’s game. These rules are subject to change from year to year, depending on how 
the game is designed and meant to be played. 

--- PAGE 12 ---

3
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Game Manual Updates
Robot Rules define how Robots may be built and configured.
Tournament Rules describe how competitions are run, and how Teams are ranked at events.
Some rules also reference Violation Notes that are located in Appendix C. These notes provide additional 
guidance on enforcement, escalation, or special circumstances. If a rule doesn’t include a cross-reference 
to Violation Notes, standard Violation definitions apply. See Appendix C for information about rule Viola-
tions and penalties.
There are also red boxes of text placed in some areas of the game manual. These are 
intended to provide further clarification and guidance in places that the Game Design Com-
mittee has deemed may benefit from things being said a different way, or presented slightly 
differently. Red Boxes are meant to be supplements to, not replace, rules or definitions.
This manual will have a series of “major” and “minor” updates over the course of the season. Each version 
is official and must be used in official V5RC events until the release of the next version, upon which the 
previous version becomes void.
The latest version of the Game Manual can always be found at https://link.vex.com/docs/26-27/v5rc/
game-manual .
Known major release dates are as follows:
Release Date Effective Date Version # Details
April 27, 2026 April 27, 2026 Version 0.1 Initial game release
May 14, 2026 May 14, 2026 N/A Official Q&A system opens
June 4, 2026 June 11, 2026 Version 0.2
Minor typographical errors or formatting 
issues found in the initial release, with 
very few rule changes expected
July 2, 2026 July 9, 2026 Version 1.0
May include gameplay or rule changes 
inspired by input from the official Q&A 
system and the VEX community
August 6, 2026 August 13, 2026 Version 1.1 Clarification / minor update
September 3, 2026 September 10, 2026 Version 2.0 May include gameplay or rule changes 
inspired by early-season events
October 8, 2026 October 15, 2026 Version 2.1 Clarification / minor update
December 3, 2026 December 10, 2026 Version 2.2 Clarification / minor update
January 28, 2027 February 4, 2027 Version 3.0 May include gameplay or rule changes 
inspired by mid-season events
March 25, 2027 April 1, 2027 Version 4.0
May include gameplay or rule changes 
pertaining specifically to the VEX 
Robotics World Championship

--- PAGE 13 ---

4
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
The Q&A System
In addition to these known major updates, there may also be unscheduled updates released throughout the 
season if deemed critical by the Game Design Committee .
Any scheduled or unscheduled updates will always be released on a Thursday, no later than 5:00 PM 
CST (11:00 PM GMT). These updates will be announced via the VEX Forum, automatically pushed to the 
V5RC Hub app, and shared via VEX Robotics / REC Foundation social media & email marketing channels. 
Once announced, the new version of the Game Manual will be immediately available at the link above.
Generally, Game Manual updates, scheduled or unscheduled, will include a grace period before the 
updated rules go into effect for competitions. See the release table above for specific dates. This grace 
period does not apply to the Version 0.1 Release, which serves as the initial rule set for the season.
Any events that begin before the 7-day grace period has ended must continue using the rules from the 
previous Game Manual Release . This policy ensures fairness and consistency, allowing Teams to adapt 
their strategies and gameplay accordingly before the changes are enforced in official competitions.
Once a manual update occurs, the previous version will be re-uploaded with an “Obsolete” watermark. 
Those will be found at https://link.vex.com/docs/26-27/v5rc/game-manual-obsolete  and will be available to 
reference through the rest of the season.
The Game Design Committee  reserves the right to enforce critical updates to the Game Manual as 
effective immediately upon release, if we feel that the changes are critical for competitive integrity, safety, 
and/or other extenuating circumstances.
Multi-week league events (or similar) that cross over a grace period should use the version of the Game 
Manual that is in effect at the beginning of each league session. Leagues should update to new versions of 
the Game Manual between sessions as appropriate.
When first reviewing a new robotics game, it is natural to have questions about situations which may not be 
immediately clear. Navigating the Game Manual and seeking out answers to these questions is an import -
ant part of learning a new game. In many cases, the answer may just be in a different place than you first 
thought - or, if there is no rule explicitly prohibiting a gameplay strategy, then that usually means it is legal!
However, if a Team is still unable to find an answer to their question after closely reviewing the relevant 
rules, then every Team has the opportunity to ask for official rules interpretations and clarifications in the 
VEX Robotics Question & Answer System. These questions may be posted by a Team’s Adult representa-
tive via the RobotEvents account that is associated with that Team.
All responses in this Q&A system should be treated as official rulings from the VEX Robotics Game Design 
Committee, and they represent the correct and official interpretation of the VEX V5 Robotics Competition 
rules. The Q&A system is the only source besides the Game Manual for official rulings and clarifications, 
and is functionally an extension of the Game Manual. Unlike Game Manual updates, Q&A rulings are effec -
tive immediately upon release.
The VEX V5 Robotics Competition Question & Answer System will open May 14th, 2026.

--- PAGE 14 ---

5
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Additional Policies and Important Links
Before posting on the Q&A system, be sure to review the Q&A Usage Guidelines :
1. The Q&A system is for rules clarifications only.
2. Only registered Teams, certified Event Partners, and certified V5RC Head Referees can post questions.
3. Read and search this Game Manual before posting.
4. Read and search existing Q&As before posting.
5. Quote the applicable rule from the latest version of this Game Manual in your question.
6. Make a separate post for each question.
7. Use specific and appropriate question titles.
8. Questions will (mostly) be answered in the order they were received.
9. This system is the only source for official rules clarifications.
10. The Game Design Committee  cannot and will not overrule a Head Referee’s decision.
If there are any conflicts between the English-language PDF of the Game Manual and other supplemental or 
translated materials (e.g., referee training materials, the V5RC Hub app, the game reveal video, a translated 
game manual, etc.), the most current version of the English-language PDF of the Game Manual takes 
precedence.
Similarly, it can never be assumed that definitions, rules, or other materials from previous seasons apply to 
the current game. Q&A responses from previous seasons are not considered official rulings for the current 
game. Any relevant clarifications that are needed should always be re-asked in the current season’s Q&A.
The rules and guidelines in these official documents and policies apply to Teams and events in the VEX V5 
Robotics Competition alongside the rules in this Game Manual.
 ● Code of Conduct - Outlines the expectations of behavior and ethical standards for all attendees at REC 
Foundation-sanctioned events.
 ● Student-Centered Policy  - Communicates the REC Foundation’s goal of maximizing learning 
opportunities for Students, and the mandate that Students use designs, code, and game strategies that 
are consistent with their abilities and knowledge. The related important behavior guidelines for Team 
Adults provides guidelines for Adults to promote Student-centeredness when interacting with Teams.
 ● VEX V5 Robotics Competition Legal Parts List  - Lists all parts made by VEX Robotics that are legal for 
use in the VEX V5 Robotics Competition.
 ● Commitment to Coach Excellence  - Communicates the partnership and expectations between the 
REC Foundation and coaches. Must be agreed to during Team registration.
 ● Commitment to Event Excellence  - Communicates the partnership and expectations between the REC 
Foundation and Event Partners, with the goal of providing Teams with quality and uniform competition 
experiences throughout our programs.

--- PAGE 15 ---

VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
6
Hierarchy of Information
 ● Guide to Judging - Provides policies and procedures for the judging process, and guidelines for Teams’ 
engineering notebooks.
 ● Organizational Policy  - Provides guidelines for organization and Team numbers that are assigned during 
Team registration.
 ● Qualifying Criteria  - Provides the criteria that Teams and events must meet to qualify for Event Region 
Championships and the VEX Robotics World Championship.
 ● Youth Protection Policy - Provides information, guidelines, and procedures to create safe environments 
for participants in our range of programs.
There is no rule in this game manual that is more important than another rule. All rules are intended to be 
enforced with the same vigor. 
The following hierarchy applies when determining official rulings while using information from beyond the 
Game Manual:
1.  The most current English-language PDF of this Game Manual
2. Official rulings published in the VEX Robotics Question & Answer (Q&A) system
3. All other supplementary documents, policies and media
The latest version of the game manual supersedes all previous versions once effective (see the Game 
Manual Updates section, for more information). If discrepancies exist between this manual and other 
materials (videos, apps, translations, training documents), the latest version of the English-language PDF 
version of this manual takes precedence.

--- PAGE 16 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Section 2
The Game

--- PAGE 17 ---

8
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Section 2 - The Game
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override: A Primer
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override is played on a 12’ x 12’ square Field, set up as illustrated in the 
figures throughout this manual. 
In Head-to-Head Matches, two (2) Alliances — one (1) “red” and one (1) “blue” — composed of two (2) Teams 
each, compete in Matches consisting of a fifteen (0:15) second Autonomous Period followed by a one 
minute and forty-five second (1:45) Driver Controlled Period. 
The object of the game is to attain a higher score than the opposing Alliance by stacking Pins and Cups 
on Goals, setting Toggles to your Alliance color, and ending the Match with your Robot in the contested 
Midfield. 
An Autonomous Win Point is awarded to any Alliance that completes a set of assigned tasks by the end of 
the Autonomous Period. 
An Autonomous Bonus is awarded to the Alliance that has the most points at the end of the Autonomous 
Period. 
Teams may also compete in Robot Skills Matches, where one (1) Robot tries to score as many points as 
possible. See Section 3 for more information. 
At the VEX U Collegiate level, Teams play in a modified Tournament with a 30-second Autonomous Period 
and additional Robot build challenges. See Section 6.


--- PAGE 18 ---

9
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Field Overview
The V5RC Override Field consists of the following:
 ● 56 Cups
 ० 20 Match Loads
 ■ 10 for red Alliance
 ■ 10 for blue Alliance
 ० 24 that start the Match in predetermined locations on the Field (gray side up)
 ० 12 that start the Match in predetermined locations on the Field (clear side up) 
 ● 63 Pins
 ० 4 red/blue that start the Match in predetermined locations
 ० 20 red/yellow
 ■ 2 Preloads
 ■ 10 Match Loads
 ■ 8 that start the Match in predetermined locations
 ० 20 blue/yellow
 ■ 2 Preloads
 ■ 10 Match Loads
 ■ 8 that start the Match in predetermined locations
 ० 19 yellow/yellow
 ■ 2 Match Loads
 ■ 17 that start the Match in predetermined locations  
 ● 9 Goals
 ० 4 Alliance colored
 ■ 2 red
 ■ 2 blue
 ० 5 neutral colored
 ■ 4 short
 ■ 1 tall 
 ● 4 Toggles 
 ● 4 Loaders, two adjacent to each Alliance Station
Note: The illustrations in this section of the Game Manual are intended to provide a general visual 
understanding of the game. Some figures may highlight or change the appearance of certain 
Field Elements and Scoring Objects to emphasize or clarify intent.
Teams should refer to official Field specifications, found in Appendix A, for exact Field dimensions, a 
full Field bill of materials, and exact details of Field construction.

--- PAGE 19 ---

10
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Figure FO-1: An overhead view of the V5RC Override Field, with Alliance Stations  (orange),
Loaders (white), Toggles (pink), and Goals (green) highlighted.

--- PAGE 20 ---

11
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Figure FO-2: An overhead view of the V5RC Override Field in its starting configuration, with icons representing orientation of Scoring Objects

--- PAGE 21 ---

12
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Figure FO-3:  The recommended locations of the Head Referee  (black & white stripes), and Scorekeeper Referees  (black & white checkerboard).

--- PAGE 22 ---

13
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Game Design Philosophy - A Letter from the GDC
We want to take the opportunity to explain how this game was designed and what kind of gameplay we 
expect to see during the season. This section also points out parts of the game that we will watch closely in 
case updates are needed.  
This is not a rules section.  It does not add any new rules. Instead, it helps you understand the purpose of the 
game and what we as designers had in mind.
What This Game is About & Scoring
Override is a game that focuses on stacking and teamwork. We intend for Teams to work together with their 
Alliance partners to assemble stacks, gain points using Scoring Objects, and control Toggles to outscore 
their opponents.
Because of this, success in the game is not just about building a good Robot. It also depends on how well you:
 ● Communicate with your partner
 ● Plan your strategy
 ● Time your actions during a Match
Teams that coordinate well and make smart decisions will have an advantage.
The game is designed so that most points come from constructive actions, such as:
 ● Building stacks
 ● Flipping Toggles
 ● Positioning your Robot effectively
Interaction with the opposing Alliance is still an important part of the game. However, Matches cannot be 
dominated by tearing down what the other Alliance has built. Some defense and disruption is expected, but 
the main focus should stay on building and scoring.
 
If strategies that focus mostly on preventing stacks become too common, the Game Design Committee  may 
consider making changes to ensure the game remains interesting with many strategy choices. We will look at 
how often these strategies are used and how they affect gameplay compared to our intentions.
Large Point Swings with Toggles and Yellow Pins  
The scoring values in Override are designed to encourage dynamic strategy and decision making. Because 
of this, it is possible for actions like controlling Toggles or scoring yellow Pins to create large point swings 
during a Match.
 
These moments can be exciting, but they should not become the only way to win. Teams should still have 
multiple viable strategies, including building stacks and competing in the Endgame.

--- PAGE 23 ---

14
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
We will monitor how these point swings impact Matches throughout the season. If they begin to outweigh 
other scoring opportunities or reduce strategic variety, the Game Design Committee  may adjust point 
values to maintain a balanced and engaging game.  
The Endgame: Final 20 Seconds  
The last 20 seconds of the Match are designed to feel more intense and competitive. During this time, the 
game shifts to a “king of the hill” style challenge in the Midfield. This section of the Match will likely include 
increased Robot interaction. As such:
 ● Positioning and timing become critical
 ● Robot durability matters more
Teams should expect more crowded and contested conditions than earlier in the Match.
At the same time, there are still rules in place (like limits on how Robots can expand) to help prevent issues 
such as tipping over or getting tangled with other Robots. If the Endgame consistently leads to problems 
like Robots getting stuck, tipping too often, or not being able to recover, the Game Design Committee  may 
adjust rules to keep Matches fair and playable.
Using Sensors in the Game  
Override is a game where sensors can be very helpful. Tools like AI Vision Sensors and Optical Sensors can 
help your Robot:
 ● Identify objects
 ● Interact with Toggles
 ● Navigate the Field
The Game Design Committee  will work to support sensor use through Field and game design. However, 
real-world conditions are not always perfect. Lighting and object placement may vary. Because of this, 
Teams should design and code their Robots so their sensors can handle small changes and still work 
reliably during a Match.
In addition, Robot rules will continue to be reviewed to make sure the game stays fair throughout the 
season. One important focus is preventing Teams from building Robots that could interfere with sensors in 
unfair ways like intentionally trying to confuse sensors or adding parts that look like Field Elements.
Making sure all Teams can rely on their sensors to work as expected is an important part of fair competition.
Have a great season!
 - The VEX V5 Robotics Competition Game Design Committee

--- PAGE 24 ---

15
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Scoring
Autonomous Bonus 12 Points
Each Placed Alliance-colored Pin 5 Points
Each Owned yellow Pin 10 Points
Each Robot in the Midfield 8 Points
<SC1> All scoring statuses are evaluated after the Match ends.  Scores are calculated five seconds after 
the Match ends, or once all Scoring Objects, Field Elements, and Robots on the Field come to rest, whichever 
comes first.
a. This 5-second delay is intended to be the only permitted “benefit of the doubt” for last-second scoring 
actions. If an object or Robot is still in motion and “too close to call” between two states at the 5-second 
mark, then the less advantageous of the two states should be awarded to the Robot(s) in question. A 
Robot which is breaking the plane of the Midfield but slowly droops down and away from the Midfield at 
five (5) seconds would not be considered in the Midfield.
b. At the end of the Match, the on-screen timer displayed by Tournament Manager will hold the current Match 
information and “0:00” for five (5) seconds before moving to queue the next Match. This should be the 
primary 5-second visual cue used by Teams and Head Referees.
c. This 5-second delay is only intended to be a “benefit of the doubt” grace period, not an extra five seconds 
of Match time. Robots which are designed to strategically exploit this grace period will receive a Minor 
Violation, and any post-Match movement will not be included in score calculation (i.e., the Match will be 
scored as it was at 0:00).
d. Referees should avoid contacting or moving Robots and/or Scoring Objects as much as possible while 
evaluating scoring statuses. If an object must be moved to evaluate the status of another object, its status 
must be agreed upon by all Teams and the Head Referee, and noted or recorded, before it is moved.
e. Referees must record counts based on verified scoring statuses evaluated after the Match, using final 
positions of Scoring Objects, Field Elements, and Robots. Point considerations used to determine whether 
a Violation is Match Affecting (e.g., specified in Violation Notes) should NOT be added to or deducted from 
the actual score, and points scored during a Violation should not be deducted from a score.
<SC2> A Pin is considered Placed  if it meets all of the following criteria at the end of the Match:
a. The Pin is partially or entirely nested with a Goal, or with a Cup that is partially or entirely nested to another 
Placed Pin.
b. That half of the Cup only contains one Pin. 
In the context of <SC2>, nested means that one half of a Pin is partially or completely con -
tained within the inner volume of the Cup. In other words, the Pin is breaking an imaginary 
plane at the opening of a Cup, in any way. Robot contact does not matter for the purposes of 
<SC2>, and a Robot that is contacting or possessing a Pin that still meets the criteria present -
ed in <SC2> does not negate the Placed status, provided no other rules are broken (particu -
larly <SG6>).

--- PAGE 25 ---

16
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<SC3> Each Pin consists of two halves. Each Placed Pin can have one or two Scored halves.  A half counts 
as Placed for the corresponding Alliance if it is either nested inside the transparent half of a Cup or is not 
covered by a Cup.
a. A Placed Pin displaying the color red is scored for the red Alliance.
b. A Placed Pin displaying the color blue is scored for the blue Alliance.
c. A Placed Pin displaying the color yellow is scored for the Alliance that Owns the Pin (see <SC5>).
<SC4> A Toggle is considered set to a color when it meets all of the following criteria at the end of the 
Match:
a. The Toggle must be fully seated, such that there is a face of the Toggle in contact and parallel with its 
mounts on the Field Perimeter at rest. (see Figure SC5-1)
b. The Toggle is not in contact with a Robot from either Alliance. 
If a Toggle is not considered set to a color, it is considered a neutral Toggle, and neither Alliance receives 
ownership of the yellow Pins in that Quadrant. While the Toggle has infinite potential orientations, only three 
discrete orientations are considered scored states.
Figure SC2-1 These Pins all count as Placed , as 
they are all at least partially nested within each other, 
and are not being contacted by any Robots.
Figure SC2-1 This Pin is not Placed , as it is 
not nested within a Cup or Goal.

--- PAGE 26 ---

17
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<SC5> Each Pin with one or more yellow halves scored can  be Owned by an Alliance.
a. A yellow Pin that is Placed in a Quadrant is Owned by an Alliance if the Toggle in that Quadrant is set to the 
Alliance’s color. If a Toggle is set to yellow, Placed yellow Pins in that Quadrant do not score points. (see 
<SC3>)
b. A yellow Pin that is Placed in the Midfield is Owned by the Alliance that ends the Match with a greater 
number of Robots in the Midfield (see <SC6>). If both Alliances end the Match with an equal number of 
Robots in the Midfield, yellow Pins scored in the Midfield are not Owned by either Alliance and do not score 
points.
Figure SC5-1 Because the Quadrant’s  Toggle is set to red, yellow 
Pins Placed in this Goal are scored for the red Alliance .
Figure SC5-2 More Robots from the blue Alliance  are in the Midfield , so 
the yellow Pins scored in this center Goal are scored for the blue Alliance .


--- PAGE 27 ---

18
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Toggle: YellowYellow Toggle: Blue Toggle: Red
Red Pins: 15 points Red Pins: 15 Points Red Pins: 15 Points
Blue Pins: 5 Points Blue Pins: 5 Points Blue Pins: 5 Points
YellowYellow Pins: 0 Points YellowYellow Pins: 30 Points 
(scored for Blue)
YellowYellow Pins: 30 Points 
(scored for Red)
Total
Red: 15 Points / Blue: 5 Points
Total
Red: 15 Points / Blue: 35 Points
Total
Red: 45 Points / Blue: 5 Points

--- PAGE 28 ---

19
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<SC6> A Robot counts as being in the Midfield  if any part of the Robot is within the infinite 3D vertical 
projection of the Midfield at the end of the Match.
<SC7> Scoring of the Autonomous Bonus is evaluated immediately after the Autonomous Period ends.
a. Points for ending the Autonomous Period in the Midfield are not included in the calculation of an 
Alliance’s score for the purposes of determining the Autonomous Bonus.
b. If the Autonomous Period ends in a tie, including a zero-to-zero tie, each Alliance will receive an 
Autonomous Bonus of six (6) points.
c. Any Violations, Major or Minor, committed during the Autonomous Period will result in the Autonomous 
Bonus being automatically awarded to the opposing Alliance. See <GG13>.
d. Per rule <GG13>, if both Alliances commit Violations during the Autonomous Period, then no 
Autonomous Bonus will be awarded. 
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUG5>.
 
 
<SC8> An Autonomous Win Point is awarded to any Alliance that ends the Autonomous Period with all of 
the following tasks completed, and that has committed no Violations during the Autonomous Period:
1. At least seven (7) Pins Placed for your Alliance (does not include Pins scored in Quadrants on the 
opposing side of the Autonomous Line)
2. At least three (3) Goals each contain at least two (2) Pins scored for your Alliance (does not include Goals 
in Quadrants on the opposing side of the Autonomous Line)
3. Neither Robot is contacting the Field Perimeter
Autonomous Win Point criteria will be slightly modified for events which qualify directly to 
the World Championship (e.g., Event Region Championships and Signature Events) and may 
be further modified for the World Championship.
The modified criteria for events which qualify directly to the World Championship will be 
released in the September 3, 2026, Game Manual update. Any Championship-qualifying 
events held prior to September 10, 2026, will use the standard criteria listed in this rule. 
The modification(s) will be minor, and will be intended to provide an increased challenge 
over the criteria listed above. For example, one possibility could be “At least eight (8) Pins 
Placed” instead of seven (7) and/or “At least four (4) Goals” instead of three (3). The standard 
criteria for all other events will not change.
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUG6>.

--- PAGE 29 ---

20
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Specific Game Rules
<SG1> Starting a Match.  Prior to the start of each Match, each Robot must be placed such that it meets all 
of the following criteria:
a. No larger than 18” (457.2 mm) long by 18” (457.2 mm) wide by 18” (457.2 mm) tall.
b. Not contacting any Scoring Objects other than a maximum of one (1) Preload. See rule <SG5>.
c. Not contacting Goals, Loaders, Load Zones, or Toggles.
d. Not contacting any other Robots, and not sharing a Quadrant with another Robot.
e. Completely stationary (i.e., no motors or other mechanisms in motion).
f. Contacting the Field tiles and Field Perimeter on their Alliance’s side of the Autonomous Line. 
Note: Using external influences, such as Preloads or the Field Perimeter, to maintain a Robot’s 
starting size is only acceptable if the Robot would still satisfy the constraints of <R3> and pass 
inspection without these influences.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
 
Clause A of this rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUG1> and <VUG3>.
Figure SG-1: An overhead view of the Field, with four Robots in legal starting positions.

--- PAGE 30 ---

21
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<SG2> Horizontal expansion is limited. Once the Match begins, Robots may expand horizontally beyond 
the starting size limit within the following criteria:
a. The Robot can never be larger than 24” wide or 24” long (must always be able to fit within a 24”x24” 
square horizontal footprint).
Teams should be aware that Robots may incidentally expand horizontally while extending 
vertically (e.g., mechanisms that arc, swing, or deploy upward). Upon request, Teams must 
be prepared to demonstrate that their Robot does not exceed the maximum size constraint 
of 24” x 24” at any point, including while any vertical expansion mechanisms are in use.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<SG3> Vertical expansion is limited.  Once the Match begins and until the Endgame period begins, Robots 
may expand vertically beyond the starting size limit, but no part of the Robot may exceed an overall height 
of 50” at any point during the Match (must always be able to fit within a hypothetical 50” vertical sizing box).
<SG4> Keep Scoring Objects in the Field.  Teams may not remove Scoring Objects from the Field. A 
Scoring Object that leaves the Field during Match play, intentionally or unintentionally, will be returned to 
the Field in a location near where it left, in contact with the Field tiles and the Field Perimeter but no other 
Field or Scoring Objects and no Robots. Volunteers should return Scoring Objects as quickly as possible, 
but this time will vary between Events and Matches, and any delay in returning an object should not be 
considered Match Affecting or cause for a replay.
a. If a Scoring Object is leaving the Field (as determined by the Head Referee), but is deflected back into 
the Field by a Drive Team Member, field monitor, ceiling/wall, or other external factor, it should still be 
considered “out of the Field” and removed by a Scorekeeper Referee or Head Referee. If the redirection 
occurred due to contact with a Drive Team Member, it will be at the Head Referee’s discretion whether 
or not <GG4> (hands out of the Field) should apply.
b. A Scoring Object that comes to rest on top of the Field Perimeter is still considered to be inside the Field 
unless it contacts something outside of the Field (e.g., volunteer, Drive Team Member, field monitor, etc.), 
and cannot be retrieved by a Drive Team Member or volunteer. 
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
Figure SG2: A demonstration of how the size of the Robot may change horizontally through the course of a vertical expansion.

--- PAGE 31 ---

22
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<SG5> Each Robot gets one Pin as a Preload.  Red Alliance Preloads are red/yellow Pins; blue Alliance 
Preloads are blue/yellow Pins. Prior to the start of each Match, each Preload must be placed such that it 
meets all of the following criteria:
a. Contacting one Robot of the same Alliance color as the Preload.
b. Not contacting the same Preload as another Robot.
c. Not contacting other Scoring Objects.
d. Not contacting any other Goals, Loaders, Load Zones, or Toggles. 
Note: If a Robot is not present for their Match, then that Robot’s Preload may be used as a Match Load 
in accordance with <SG11>.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<SG6> Possession is limited to a maximum of one Pin and one Cup.  Robots may not have possession 
of more than one (1) Pin at once. Robots may not have possession of more than (1) Cup at once. Robots in 
Violation of this rule must immediately stop all actions except for attempting to remove the excess Scoring 
Objects.
If they are unable to remove the excess Scoring Objects, then they must return to a legal starting position 
(as described by <SG1>). They will not be eligible to receive points for ending the Match in the Midfield, and 
cannot interact with Toggles, Goals, or other Scoring Objects while in possession of excess Scoring Objects.
a. Plowing multiple Scoring Objects is permitted. Teams which employ plowing strategies are encouraged to 
clearly demonstrate that none of the Scoring Objects are being possessed, e.g., by using a flat face of the 
Robot with no active mechanisms.
 
<SG7> Don’t cross the Autonomous Line, and don’t interfere with your opponents’ actions.  During the 
Autonomous Period, Robots may not contact foam tiles, Scoring Objects, or Field Elements which are on the 
opposing Alliance’s side of the Autonomous Line.
a. The Autonomous Period should be primarily Offensive, with Teams focusing on scoring and executing 
strategic maneuvers rather than Defensive disruption. Teams should avoid actions that are primarily 
Defensive in nature, including but not limited to:
i. Intentionally disrupting Scoring Objects or Field Elements on the opponent’s side of the Autonomous 
Line.
ii. Deliberately contacting an opponent’s Robot to interfere with their autonomous path.
b. Scoring Objects that begin the Match in contact with the Autonomous Line are not considered to be on 
either side, and may be utilized by either Alliance during the Autonomous Period. For the purpose of this 
rule, all 20 Scoring Objects that begin the Match on or at the Autonomous Line are considered to be in 
contact with the Autonomous Line. See Figure SG-7.
c. While incidental contact or unintentional interactions may occur with Robots on the other side of the 
Autonomous Line, Teams that employ deliberate Defensive autonomous strategies that impact their 
opponents’ autonomous routines may be subject to Minor or Major Violations at the discretion of the 
Head Referee.

--- PAGE 32 ---

23
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
d. Teams cannot intentionally place Scoring Objects on the opponent’s side of the Autonomous Line.
e. Contact with either of the following during the Autonomous Period will result in the Autonomous Bonus 
and an Autonomous Win Point being awarded to the opposing Alliance, unless the opposing Alliance 
also breaks rules in the Autonomous Period:
i. An opponent Robot that isn’t interacting with the Autonomous Line, objects that begin the Match 
positioned above or in contact with the Autonomous Line, or the Midfield (see <SG8>).
ii. Scoring Objects on the other side of the Autonomous Line. 
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
Figure SG-7: These Scoring Objects  (circled in red) would be considered to be on the Autonomous Line .
<SG8> Engage with the Midfield and/or Autonomous Line during the Autonomous Period at your 
own risk. Any Robot that engages with the Midfield and/or Scoring Objects that begin the Match on the 
Autonomous Line should be aware that opponent Robots may also choose to do the same. Per <GG12> and 
<GG13>, Teams are responsible for the actions of their Robots at all times.
a. For the purposes of this rule, “engages with” means any combination of:
i. Contacting foam tiles within the Midfield
ii. Contacting the Goal in the Midfield
iii. Contacting Scoring Objects that begin the Match on the Autonomous Line
b. If opposing Robots contact one another while both engaging with the Midfield or the Autonomous 
Line, and a possible <GG14> Violation occurs (e.g., damage, Entanglement, or tipping over), a judgment 
call will be made by the Head Referee within the context of <GG14> and <GG15> (just as it would if the 

--- PAGE 33 ---

24
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
interaction had occurred during the Driver Controlled Period ).
c. If opposing Robots contact one another while both engaging with the Midfield or Autonomous Line, and 
an incidental Violation of <SG4> occurs, no penalty will be assessed on either Alliance.
d. Intentional, strategic, repeated, or egregious offenses, such as negatively impacting Robots that are not 
engaging with the Midfield or the Autonomous Line, may still be deemed a Violation of <GG13>, <GG14>, 
<GG15>, <SG7>, <G1>, and/or <S1> at the Head Referee’s discretion.
The Midfield and the Scoring Objects that begin on the Autonomous Line are intended to be 
utilized by both Alliances during the Autonomous Period. This will inevitably result in Ro-
bot-on-Robot interactions, both incidental and intentional. The overarching intent of <SG8> 
is for the vast majority of these interactions to result in no rule Violations and / or penalties 
for either Alliance, just as no rules Violations occur in 99% of Driver Controlled interactions.
Teams are responsible for the actions of their Robots at all times. A Robot with a small wheel 
base, which tips over every time they enter the Midfield and contacts an opponent, should 
not attempt to claim a <GG14> Violation on their opponent.
With that being said, the Midfield is a neutral zone, not a “free-for-all” zone. The intent of 
clause D is to provide Head Referees with the leeway to still make a judgment call, if needed, 
when a Team has chosen to exploit this rule beyond its intent. Reckless or unsafe strategies 
aimed solely at the destruction, damage, tipping over, Entanglement, Trapping, or forcing of 
an opponent into a penalty are still prohibited in the VEX Robotics Competition. 
<SG9> Alliance Goals are protected.  Robots may not directly or indirectly interact with the opposing Alli-
ance-colored Goals. This includes both Placing and removing Scoring Objects.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
 
<SG10> Scoring Objects can’t be removed from neutral or opposing Alliance-colored Goals.  Robots may 
not remove Scoring Objects from Goals that do not match their Alliance color.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<SG11> Match Loads may be introduced during the Match under certain conditions.  For the purpose of 
this rule, “introduce” refers to the moment when a Drive Team Member has released a Scoring Object into a 
Loader.
During this action, a Drive Team Member’s hands may temporarily break the plane of the Field Perimeter. This 
momentary interaction is an exception to rule <GG4>. Excessive, unnecessary, or unsafe actions while intro -
ducing a Match Load may be considered a Violation of <S1> and/or <G1> at the Head Referee’s discretion.

--- PAGE 34 ---

25
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Drive Team Members may introduce Match Load Scoring Objects by placing a single Pin, a single Cup, 
or a nested Cup and Pin into either of their Alliance-colored Loaders. Scoring Objects can be introduced 
through the top of the Loader when the Loader is not lifted, or through the back of the Loader when the 
Loader is raised by a Drive Team Member.
a. Scoring Objects may only be added to Loaders during the Driver Controlled Period of a Match.
b. A Match Load Scoring Object may not be contacted by a Robot prior to being placed into a Loader.
c. Match Load Scoring Objects may only be removed through the bottom opening of the Loader, by a 
Robot whose Alliance color matches the Loader. 
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUG4>.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
Figure SG11-1 Scoring Objects  can be introduced 
through the top opening of the Loader.
Figure SG11-2: Scoring Objects  may also be introduced 
through the back of the Loader while it is raised.
<SG12> Some rules change during the Endgame period.
1. Vertical expansion is limited to 18” for any Robot that is partially or entirely within the infinite 3D vertical 
projection of the Midfield.
2. Robots that attempt to end the Match in the Midfield should expect vigorous interactions from 
opponent Robots. When a Robot is contacting or engaging with the Midfield, or is in proximity to the 
Midfield, incidental damage that is caused by opponent Robots pushing, tipping, or becoming Entangled 
with them would not be considered a Violation of <GG14>. Intentional damage or dangerous mecha -
nisms may still be considered a Violation of <S1>, or <G1> at the Head Referee’s discretion. 
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUG7>

--- PAGE 35 ---

26
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Safety Rules
<S1> Be safe out there. If at any time the Robot operation or Team actions are deemed unsafe or have 
damaged a Field Element, Scoring Object, or the Field, the offending Team may receive a Disablement and/
or Disqualification  at the discretion of the Head Referee. The Robot will require re-inspection as described 
in rule <R2> before it may take the Field again.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<S2> Students must be accompanied by an Adult.  Every Student at a VEX Robotics Competition event 
must be supervised by a responsible Adult. The Adult must obey all rules and be careful to not violate 
Student-centered policies, but must be present for the full duration of the event in the case of an emergen -
cy. Violations of this rule may result in removal from the event and additional penalties.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<S3> Each Student Team member must have a completed participant release form on file for the event 
and season. A Student Team member cannot participate in an event without a completed release form on 
file.
<S4> Stay inside the Field.  If a Robot is completely outside of the Field during a Match, it will receive a 
Disablement for the remainder of the Match.
Note: The intent of this rule is not to penalize Robots for having mechanisms that inadvertently cross 
the Field Perimeter during normal game play.
<S5> Wear safety glasses.  Drive Team Members must wear eye protection. All Drive Team Members must 
wear some form of eye protection while at the Field for Matches. Safety glasses or other eye wear with side 
shields and non-shattering lenses are recommended. While in the pit and queuing areas, it is highly recom -
mended that all Team members wear eye protection.

--- PAGE 36 ---

27
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
General Rules
<G1> Treat everyone with respect. All Teams and other attendees are expected to conduct themselves 
in a respectful and professional manner while participating in or attending VEX V5 Robotics Competition 
events. If a Team or any of its members (Students or anyone else associated with the Team or its members) 
are disrespectful or uncivil to event staff, volunteers, or fellow competitors, they may be Disqualified from 
a current or upcoming Match. Team conduct pertaining to <G1> may also impact a Team’s eligibility for 
judged awards. Repeated or extreme Violations of <G1> could result in a Team being Disqualified from an 
entire event, depending on the severity of the situation.
This rule exists alongside the RECF Code of Conduct. Violation of the Code of Conduct can result in 
Disqualification  from a current Match, an upcoming Match, an entire event, or (in extreme cases) an entire 
competition season. The Code of Conduct is available in the RECF Library.
a. Event attendees are not allowed to record audio or video of Teams’ discussions with Head Referees or 
other event staff/volunteers.
More information regarding the event Code of Conduct process can be found in figure V-3 and the RECF 
Library.
We all can contribute to creating a fun and inclusive event experience for all event attend -
ees. Some examples include:
When dealing with difficult and stressful situations, it is…
 ● Okay for Teams to be gracious and supportive when your Alliance partner makes a 
mistake.
 ● Not okay for Teams to harass, tease, or be disrespectful to your Alliance partner when a 
Match does not go your way.
When a Team does not understand a Match ruling or score, it is…
 ● Okay for Drive Team Members to consult with a Head Referee to discuss a ruling per the 
process outlined in <T3> in a calm and respectful manner.
 ● Not okay for Drive Team Members to continue arguing with the Head Referee after a 
decision has been finalized, or for Adults to approach a Head Referee with ruling/scoring 
concerns.
When Teams are getting ready for an upcoming Match, it is…
 ● Okay for Teams in an Alliance to develop a game strategy that utilizes the strengths of 
both Robots to cooperatively solve the game.
 ● Not okay for one Team in an Alliance to ask another Team to sit in a corner during the 
Match or to intentionally play beneath their abilities.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.

--- PAGE 37 ---

28
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<G2> V5RC is a Student-centered program.  Adults should not make decisions about the Team’s/Robot’s 
build, design, coding, documentation, or gameplay, and should not provide an unfair advantage by providing 
‘help’ that is beyond the Students’ independent abilities. Students must be prepared to demonstrate an 
active understanding of their design, Robot construction, programming, notebook, and strategies to 
judges or event staff. Students should build, design, and code the Robot with minimal Adult involvement. If 
a Team has an engineering notebook, the format, layout, and contents should be created and maintained by 
Students with minimal Adult involvement; Adults should not transcribe or type notebook entries or code for 
Students.
Some amount of Adult mentorship, teaching, and/or guidance is an expected and encouraged facet of 
VEX competitions. No one is born an expert in robotics! However, obstacles should always be viewed as 
teaching opportunities, not problems for an Adult to solve for the Team.
When building or designing the Robot, it is…
 ● Okay for an Adult to help a Student consider why something failed, so it can be 
improved.
 ● Not okay for an Adult to provide step by step instructions or photos for the Student to 
copy.
When a mechanism falls off, it is…
 ● Okay for an Adult to help a Student consider why it failed, so it can be improved.
 ● Not okay for an Adult to investigate or put the Robot back together.
When a Team encounters a complex programming concept, it is…
 ● Okay for an Adult to guide a Student through a flowchart to understand its logic.
 ● Not okay for an Adult to write a premade command for that Student to copy/paste.
During Match play, it is…
 ● Okay for an Adult to provide cheerful, positive encouragement as a spectator.
 ● Not okay for an Adult to shout step-by-step commands from the audience.
This rule operates in tandem with the RECF Student Centered Policy, which is available in the RECF Library 
for Teams to reference throughout the season.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<G3> Use common sense. When reading and applying the various rules in this document, please 
remember that common sense always applies in the VEX V5 Robotics Competition.
Some examples include: 
 ● If there is an obvious typographical error (such as “per <T5>” instead of “per <GG5>”), 
this does not mean that the error should be taken literally until corrected in a future 
update.

--- PAGE 38 ---

29
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
 ● Understand the realities of the VEX V5 Robot construction system. For example, if a Robot 
could hover above the Field for a whole Match, that would create loopholes in many of the 
rules. But… they can’t. So… don’t worry about it.
 ● When in doubt, if there is no rule prohibiting an action, it is generally legal. However, if you 
have to ask whether a given action would violate <S1>, <G1>, or <T1> then that’s probably a 
good indication that it is outside the spirit of the competition. On the other hand, if there’s 
not a rule that makes a Robot part legal, it’s not allowed.
 ● In general, Teams will be given the “benefit of the doubt” in the case of accidental or edge-
case rules infractions. However, there is a limit to this allowance, and repeated or strategic 
infractions will still be penalized.
 ● This rule also applies to Robot rules. If a component’s legality cannot be easily/intuitively 
discerned by the Robot rules as written, then Teams should expect additional scrutiny 
during inspection. This especially applies to those rules which govern non-VEX compo -
nents (e.g. <R18>, <R19>, <R22>, etc). There is a difference between “creativity” and “law -
yering.” Basically, if there’s not a rule that makes a Robot part legal, it’s not allowed.
<G4> All work must represent the skill level of the Students on the Team.  All work must represent the skill 
level of the Students currently on the Team. Teachers, coaches, mentors, and peers can teach  concepts, 
skills, and processes; demonstrate techniques; ask guiding questions; review/critique the Team’s work; and 
otherwise advise Team members. All final solutions used in competition (including the Team’s design, Robot, 
code, strategies, documentation, and ongoing work) must be the work of the Student Team members. Orga-
nizations should develop a plan that encourages and empowers Students to make their own decisions (see 
<G2>).
a. Designs and code provided by the RECF and/or VEX Robotics:
i. Teams may use Robot plans and code (e.g., Hero Bots, VEXcode configurations, etc.) provided by 
VEX Robotics or the RECF, but are encouraged to use these Robots, mechanisms, and code only as a 
starting point that Students modify, improve, or replace as their skills increase.
ii. Plans provided by VEX Robotics and/or the RECF are the only legal plans available for use in 
competition.
b. Robot design and construction:
i. Teams must avoid academic dishonesty and should not directly copy a Robot or mechanism other than 
those included in clause A. This includes, but is not limited to, the use of instructions, pictures, videos, 
notebooks, CAD designs, and/or any other documentation useful to the design process.
ii. Teams may be inspired by designs created by other Teams, and can use an idea from someone else 
to spark innovation, but are expected to clearly document and give credit to all ideas that are used for 
inspiration. The Team must describe how they made meaningful changes to the original idea to arrive 
at a design that is uniquely their own. It should be clear that this final implementation is not an exact 
copy of ANY other original design.
iii. Teams should demonstrate their design process in their engineering notebook, and provide it if asked 
to do so by event staff. Failure to demonstrate evidence of iteration, innovation, and/or modification will 
result in a Violation.
iv. Teams may only use custom parts (e.g., cut/shaped non-shattering plastic, or heavily modified legal 
VEX components) that were designed and created by the Students on that Team.

--- PAGE 39 ---

30
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
c. Robot code:
i. Teams may use publicly available example code and/or custom libraries from outside sources, but 
in accordance with the RECF Student Centered Policy, Student Team members must understand 
the resulting code, be able to explain all facets of their competition code, and be capable of inde -
pendently creating code on a level equivalent to the code used on their Robot if asked to do so.
ii. Teams may not use Large Language Models, or similar forms of artificial intelligence (AI), to create 
or improve the code used in competition, as the resulting code does not reflect the skill level of the 
Students on the Team.
d. Engineering notebook:
i. The Team’s engineering notebook must be the work of the Students on the Team, and cannot be 
edited, formatted, or revised by anyone other than the Students on the Team.
ii. Teams may not use Large Language Models, or similar forms of AI, to create or improve the content 
of their engineering notebook.
iii. Teams can be inspired by engineering notebooks and formats from other Teams and/or seasons, 
but must ensure that all content is original and created by the members of the Team. For more 
information and guidelines for engineering notebooks, consult the Guide to Judging.
e. Collaboration with other Teams:
i. Teams can collaborate on game analysis, brainstorming, strategy, and other steps of the engineer -
ing design process, but the final solutions used/presented at competitions must be the independent 
work of the Students on each Team.
ii. Robots, code, and/or engineering notebooks that are identical or substantially similar to one another 
across Teams, whether they’re within the same school/organization/club or from separate orga -
nizations, are in Violation of this rule, regardless of whether they compete in the same or different 
events. Every Team is expected to put in the time, effort, and resources needed to undergo an 
independent design process and develop their own Robots and code. 
Teams that use outside designs, instructions, code, and/or other materials instead of doing 
their own work undermine the core mission of the program: to provide Students with own-
ership of their work through hands-on opportunities to learn, design, and innovate.
While it is never our desire to punish Students, we must preserve the fairness, educational 
value, and integrity of the competition. Each Team must be able to explain and defend the 
design, construction, and programming of their Robot if questioned by event staff. 
Event organizers cannot reasonably know the origins of every design or independent -
ly verify whether a Robot was created from scratch, purchased online, or copied from 
pictures of another Team’s design. When questions of authenticity arise, the only direct 
and fair approach is to require Students to explain and defend their work (in conversation 
and through their engineering notebook if the Team has one), and Students should be 
prepared to describe their design process, justify design decisions, and demonstrate a full 
understanding of how their Robot and code function. This is not unlike academic honesty 
concerns in schools, and intellectual property concerns in business. By requiring Students 
to defend their designs, we ensure that they are developing not only technical skills, but 

--- PAGE 40 ---

31
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
effective communication skills and accountability as well.  If a Team is unable to provide 
reasonable evidence that their Robot, code, and documentation are the result of their 
own work, it is appropriate to assume that the Team is in Violation of <G2> and/or <G4>.
Consequences may include Disqualification  from Matches, removal from events, and/or 
escalation of the investigation to VEX Robotics and/or RECF for further disciplinary action, 
which may include sanctions up to and including removal from the program.
 
Event staff should bear in mind <G3>, and use common sense when enforcing this rule. 
It is not the intent to actively hunt for Violations of this rule, compare every Robot at an 
event to all other known Robot designs, or closely question every Team at an event about 
their Robot’s code. This rule is a set of tools for use if potential Violations are noted by or 
reported to event staff, and it is expected that most Teams will never be required to defend 
their Robot design or code.
Teams or individuals who deliberately weaponize, manipulate, or falsely report <G4> Vio-
lations for competitive gain or to harass another Team may be subject to a separate RECF 
Code of Conduct investigation. Misuse of this rule is considered a serious Violation.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<G5> Each Student can only belong to one Team.  Each Team must include Drive Team Members, 
Coder(s), Designer(s), and Builder(s). Many also include Strategists and Notebooker(s). No Student may fulfill 
any of these roles for more than one VEX V5 Robotics Competition Team in a given competition season. 
Students may have more than one role on the Team (e.g., the Designer may also be the Builder, the Coder, 
and a Drive Team Member).
a. Team members may only move from one Team to another for non-strategic reasons outside of the 
Team’s control.
i. Examples of permissible moves may include, but are not limited to, changing schools, conflicts 
within a Team, or combining/splitting Teams.
ii. Examples of strategic moves in Violation of this rule may include, but are not limited to, one Coder 
“switching” Teams in order to program multiple Robots, one Student designing multiple Teams’ 
Robots, or one Student writing the engineering notebook for multiple Teams.
iii. If a Student leaves a Team to join another Team, <G4> still applies to the Students remaining on the 
previous Team. For example, if a Coder leaves a Team, then that Team’s Robot must still represent 
the skill level of the Team without that Coder. One way to accomplish this would be to ensure that the 
Coder teaches or trains a “replacement” Coder in their absence.
iv. Points ii and iii are intended to represent real-world situations that are found in industry engineering. 
If a vital member of a professional engineering team were to suddenly leave, the remaining members 
of the team should still be capable of working on / maintaining their project.
b. When a Team qualifies for a Championship event (e.g., States, Nationals, Worlds, etc.) the Students 
on the Team attending the Championship event are expected to be the same Students on the Team 
that was awarded the spot. Students can be added as support to the Team, but may not be added as 
Builders, Drive Team Members, Coders, or Notebookers for the Team.

--- PAGE 41 ---

32
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
i. An exception is allowed if only one (1) member of the Team is able to attend the event. The Team 
can make a single substitution of a Drive Team Member or Coder for the Championship event with 
another Student, even if that Student has competed on a different Team. This Student will now be a 
member of this new Team and may not substitute back to the original Team during the season.
 
Note: Teams cannot “borrow” Students from other Teams to serve as Drive Team Members, Coders, 
Designers, Builders, or Notebookers. However, Teams can add permanent members throughout the 
season under the guidelines of this rule.  
Event Partners should bear in mind <G3>, and use common sense when enforcing this rule. 
It is not the intent to punish a Team who may change Team members over the course of a 
season due to illness, changing schools, conflicts within a Team, etc. 
Event Partners and referees are not expected to keep a roster of any Student who has ever 
been a Drive Team Member for one day. This rule is intended to prevent any instance of 
loaning or sharing Team members for the sole purpose of gaining a competitive advantage.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
 
<G6> There is a difference between accidentally and willfully violating a Robot rule.  Any Violation of 
Robot rules, accidental or intentional, will result in a Team being unable to play until they pass inspection 
(per <R2d>).
However, Teams who intentionally and/or knowingly circumvent or violate rules to gain an advantage over 
their fellow competitors are in Violation of the spirit and ethos of the competition.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.

--- PAGE 42 ---

33
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<GG1> Only Drive Team Members, and only in the Alliance Station.  During a Match, Robots may be 
operated only by that Team’s Drive Team Members and/or by software running on the Robot’s control 
system in accordance with <R9> and <GG11>. A Team may send up to (3) Drive Team Members to their 
Alliance Station for each Robot, and those Drive Team Members must remain in their Alliance Station for the 
duration of the Match.
Drive Team Members are the only Team members that are allowed to be in the Alliance Station during a 
Match. Adults (other than event staff) are not permitted to be in the Alliance Station during a Match.
a. Drive Team Members are prohibited from any of the following actions during a Match:
i. Using any sort of communication device in the Alliance Station. Non-headphone devices with com -
munication features turned off (e.g., a phone in airplane mode, a walkie talkie turned off, smart glasses 
with communication features disabled) are allowed. Communication features can be enabled for 
translation apps during post- Match discussions.
ii. Standing or sitting on any sort of object during a Match, regardless of whether the Field is on the floor 
or elevated, except as required by an official accommodation request that has been approved by the 
RECF.
iii. Bringing/using additional materials to simplify the game challenge during a Match (e.g., device to align 
or add Scoring Objects to a Loader.
iv. To ensure that Drive Team Members are aware of verbal calls during a Match (as an application of 
rules <T1>, <G1>, <S1>, and <G3>), powered headphones, earbuds, passive earpieces connected to 
electronic devices, or other personal accessories/devices that transmit audio cannot be worn/used in 
the Alliance Station except as required by an official accommodation request that has been approved 
by the RECF.
b. Individuals who are not Drive Team Members for a Match cannot provide directions, commands, or 
advice to the Drive Team Members during that Match. They’re welcome to provide cheerful, positive 
encouragement, but should not affect Match play or strategy. 
Point iii is intended to refer to non- Robot-related items that directly influence gameplay, such 
as a speaker that plays a buzzer sound to distract your opponent. Provided no other rules are 
violated, and the items do not pose any safety or Field damage risks, the following examples 
are not considered Violations of <GG1>:
 ● Materials used before or after a Match, such as a pre-Match alignment aid
 ● Strategic aids, such as a whiteboard or clipboard
 ● Earplugs, gloves, or other personal accessories
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<GG2> A Team’s Robot should attend every Match.  The Team’s Robot must be in the Alliance Station or 
on the Field for the Team’s assigned Match, even if the Robot is not functional. If the Robot is not at the Field 
for the entire duration of the Match, the Team will be considered a “no-show” and receive zero (0) Win Points, 
Autonomous Win Points, Autonomous Points, and Strength of Schedule Points .
General Game Rules

--- PAGE 43 ---

34
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
a. Teams are expected to participate in all scheduled Qualification Matches , Alliance Selection, and 
Elimination Matches  (if they’re an Alliance Captain  or were selected to join an Alliance for Elimination 
Matches). Failure to attend scheduled Matches or Alliance Selection may be considered a Violation of 
<G1> and the Code of Conduct. Teams that participate in zero Qualification Matches  cannot be consid-
ered for judged awards.
<GG3> Robots on the Field must be ready to play.  When a Team puts their Robot on the Field, it must be 
prepared to play (e.g., battery charged, sized within the starting size constraint, includes only the correct 
Alliance-color license plates, etc.).
a. Robots must be placed on the Field promptly. Repeated failure to do so could result in a Violation of 
<G1> and/or removal of the Robot from the current Match at the Head Referee’s discretion.
b. If a Robot is delaying the scheduled start of a Match, it may be removed from the Field at the discretion 
of the Head Referee and Event Partner. The Robot may remain at the Field so that the Team does not get 
assessed a “no-show” (per <GG2>).
c. If a Robot is not placed on the Field prior to the start of a Match, it cannot be placed on the Field during 
that Match.
d. Teams who use VEX pneumatics must have their systems charged before they place the Robot on the 
Field.
e. If an event is using Smart Field Control and a Robot is unable to successfully connect to Smart Field 
Control prior to the scheduled start of a Match, the Head Referee may ask the Team to remove their 
Robot from the Field in accordance with clause B.
i. A Robot that connects to Smart Field Control but displays a ‘Legacy Field Control’ error on the field 
monitor is NOT considered successfully connected to Smart Field Control, and may be removed 
from the Field if it is delaying the scheduled start of a Match. 
The definition of the word “promptly” as used in clause A is at the discretion of the Event 
Partner and Head Referee, who will consider event schedule, previous Violations or delays, 
etc. As a general guideline, five seconds to check Robot alignment would be acceptable, 
but five minutes to assemble multiple parts together would not.
<GG4> Hands out of the Field.  During a Match, Drive Team Members are prohibited from making intention -
al contact with any Field Element, Robot, or Scoring Object that has been introduced to the Field, except for 
the contact specified in <GG4a> or while introducing Match Loads as described in rule <SG11>.
a. Drive Team Members are not permitted to reach into the 3-dimensional volume of the Field Perimeter at 
any time during the Match, apart from the actions described above. Rule <S1> applies. 
b. Any concerns regarding Field Element or Scoring Object starting positions should be raised with the 
Head Referee prior to the Match. Team members may never adjust Scoring Objects or Field Elements 
themselves.
c. Transitive contact, such as contact with the Field Perimeter that causes the Field Perimeter to contact 
Field Elements or objects inside of the Field, could be considered a Violation of this rule.

--- PAGE 44 ---

35
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
d. During the Driver Controlled Period, Drive Team Members may only touch their own Robot if the Robot 
has not moved at all during the Match. Movement caused by an external force, such as another Robot, 
should not prevent a Drive Team Member from interacting with their Robot under this rule. Touching the 
Robot in this case is permitted only for the following reasons:
i. Turning the Robot on or off.
ii. Plugging in a battery.
iii. Plugging in a V5 Robot Radio.
iv. Touching the V5 Robot Brain screen, such as to start a program.  
If a Drive Team Member’s hands extend over the Field and/or Field Perimeter in a way that is 
safe and doesn’t contact anything in the Field, it’s unlikely to be a Violation. However, Head 
Referees may still ask Drive Team Members to step back and remain completely outside 
the Field when necessary (e.g., for safety reasons or to reduce the chances of gameplay 
interference).
<GG5> Match replays are allowed, but rare.  Match replays (i.e., playing a Match over again from its start) 
must be agreed upon by both the Event Partner and Head Referee, and will only be issued in the most 
extreme circumstances. Some example situations that may warrant a Match replay are as follows (note that 
this is not an exhaustive list):
a. Match Affecting “Field fault” issues.
i. One or more Field Elements and/or Scoring Objects starting in incorrect positions, and out of the 
allowed tolerances (see <T5>).
ii. Tape lines lifting.
iii. Field Elements detaching or moving beyond normal tolerances (not as a result of Robot interactions).
iv. The Autonomous Period or Driver Controlled Period ending early.
v. Field control disconnecting or Disabling multiple Robots. Note, this is sometimes confused with 
a Robot whose motors have overheated, or bent pins on a controller’s competition port causing 
intermittent drop-outs. In general, any true Field fault will impact both Alliances simultaneously, not 
one Robot at a time.
b. Match Affecting game rule issues.
i. Head Referee Disables a Robot for a misinterpretation of a rule Violation.
ii. Head Referee starts the Driver Controlled Period of the Match without determining the outcome of 
the Autonomous Period winner.
c. The Field is reset before a score is determined.
d. A Match is run before its scheduled time without a Team. 
Note: Communication or control issues affecting a single Robot are not considered eligible 
grounds for a replay.

--- PAGE 45 ---

36
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<GG6> Disqualifications.  When a Team receives a Disqualification  in a Qualification Match , they receive a 
score of zero (0) for the Match, as well as zero (0) Win Points, Autonomous Win Points, Autonomous Points, 
and Strength of Schedule Points .
a. If the Team receiving the Disqualification  is on the winning Alliance, then Teams on the opposing 
Alliance who are not also Disqualified will receive the win for the Match and two (2) Win Points.
i. The Team’s non-Disqualified Alliance Partner is unaffected, i.e., they will also receive the win for the 
Match and two (2) Win Points.
b. If the Match was a tie, then each Team on the opposing Alliance (the Alliance that did not receive the 
Disqualification ) will receive the win for the Match and two (2) Win Points. If both Alliances have a Team 
receiving a Disqualification , then all non-Disqualified Teams will receive a tie for the Match and one (1) 
Win Point.
c. Autonomous Win Points are not given to Teams that receive a Disqualification , and are not automatically 
awarded to the opposing Alliance.
When a Team is Disqualified in an Elimination Match, the entire Alliance is Disqualified ; they receive a loss 
for the Match, and the opposing Alliance is awarded the win. If both Alliances receive a Disqualification  in an 
Elimination Match, both Alliances receive a loss and will play another Match to determine a winner.
Note: If a Team is Disqualified in a Robot Skills Match, a score of zero (0) will be recorded for that 
Match.
<GG7> Time-outs. Each Elimination Alliance gets one three-minute Time-out, which they may request 
during the Elimination Bracket . The Time-out will be served at the time of the Alliance’s next upcoming 
Match. Alliances must request their Time-out between Elimination Matches ; they may not use their Time-
out during a Match, for another Alliance’s Match, or after they have been eliminated. There are no Time-outs 
during the Qualification Match  schedule.
a. A Time-out can be ended early, but only if agreed to by both Alliances and the Head Referee.
b. An Alliance’s Time-out request should never be denied if the Alliance legitimately needs extra time.
<GG8> Keep your Robots together. Robots may not intentionally detach parts during the Match or leave 
mechanisms on the Field.
Note: Parts which become detached unintentionally are a Minor Violation , are no longer considered 
“part of a Robot,” and should be ignored for the purpose of any rules which involve Robot contact or 
location (e.g., scoring) or Robot size.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<GG9> Don’t hook your Robot to the Field, and don’t get Entangled.  Robots may not intentionally grasp, 
grapple, hook, attach to or otherwise Entangled with any Field Elements. Strategies with mechanisms 
that react against multiple sides of a Field Element in an effort to latch or hook onto said Field Element are 
prohibited. The intent of this rule is to prevent Teams from unintentionally damaging the Field and/or from 
anchoring to or otherwise Entangling themselves with the Field.

--- PAGE 46 ---

37
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Whenever possible, Head Referees should alert Teams to potential Violations before they happen to 
prevent actual Violations. If a Robot takes immediate action to avoid or resolve the issue, and if the Head 
Referee determines that the issue had no effect on the Match, no Violation should be recorded.
<GG10> The red Alliance may choose to place last.  The red Alliance has the right to place its Robots 
on the Field last in Qualification Matches  and Elimination Matches . Once a Team has placed its Robot on 
the Field, in order to avoid schedule delays its position should not be adjusted prior to the Match. <GG3> 
applies. If a Team chooses to reposition their Robot after it has already been placed, the opposing Alliance 
will also be given the opportunity to reposition their Robots promptly.
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUG2>
 
<GG11> Controllers must stay connected to the Field.  Prior to the beginning of each Match, Drive Team 
Members must plug their V5 Controller into the Field’s control system. This cable must remain plugged in 
for the duration of the Match, and may not be removed until the “all-clear” has been given for Drive Team 
Members to retrieve their Robots. See <T8> for more information regarding Field control system options.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<GG12> Autonomous means “no humans.”  During the Autonomous Period, Drive Team Members are not 
permitted to interact with the Robots in any way, directly or indirectly. This could include, but is not limited 
to:
 ● Activating any controls on their V5 Controllers
 ● Unplugging or otherwise manually interfering with the Field connection in any way
 ● Manually triggering sensors (including the Vision Sensor) in any way, even without touching them  
Note: In extreme cases, with permission from the Head Referee, Teams may Disable their Robot 
during the Autonomous Period by holding the power button on their V5 Controller. This exception 
is only intended for egregious safety- or damage-related circumstances; Disabling an autonomous 
routine for strategic purposes would still be considered a Violation of <GG12>.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<GG13> All rules still apply in the Autonomous Period.  Teams are responsible for the actions of their 
Robots at all times, including during the Autonomous Period. Any Violations, Major or Minor, committed 
during the Autonomous Period will result in the Autonomous Bonus being automatically awarded to the 
opposing Alliance and make the violating Team’s Alliance ineligible for the Autonomous Win Point.
If both Alliances commit Violations during the Autonomous Period, then no Autonomous Bonus will be 
awarded.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.

--- PAGE 47 ---

38
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<GG14> Don’t destroy other Robots.  But, be prepared to encounter defense.  Strategies aimed solely at 
the destruction, damage, tipping over, or Entanglement of opposing Robots are not part of the ethos of the 
VEX V5 Robotics Competition and are not allowed.
a. V5RC Override is intended to be an Offensive game. Teams that partake in solely Defensive or destruc-
tive strategies will not have the protections implied by this rule (see <GG15>). However, Defensive play 
which does not involve destructive or illegal strategies is still within the spirit of this rule.
b. V5RC Override is also intended to be an interactive game. Some incidental tipping, Entanglement, and 
damage may occur as a part of normal gameplay without Violation. It will be up to the Head Referee’s 
discretion whether the interaction was incidental or intentional.
c. A Team is responsible for the actions of its Robot at all times, including the Autonomous Period. This 
applies both to Teams that are driving recklessly or potentially causing damage, and to Teams whose 
Robots have small and/or unstable wheel bases. A Team should design its Robot such that it is not easily 
tipped over or damaged by minor contact.
d. <GG14> may be applied differently in the Midfield during the Endgame. See <SG12>. 
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
 
 
<GG15> Offensive Robots get the “benefit of the doubt” when judgment calls are required.  In a case 
where a Head Referee is forced to make a judgment call regarding a destructive interaction between a 
Defensive and Offensive Robot, or an interaction which results in a questionable Violation, referees will 
decide in favor of the Offensive Robot. This also applies during the Autonomous Period (see <SG7a>).
This rule is intended to be a “logical tiebreaker” for use only when referees cannot make a 
clear and definitive ruling without it. It should not be used or applied in every situation. Most 
Violations should be resolved without considering this rule.
Head Referees must apply judgment when determining whether each Robot in a <GG15> 
interaction was Defensive or Offensive, and in some cases may need to consider which 
Robot was more Defensive or Offensive than another within the larger context of the Match. 
In these cases, the Head Referee should decide in favor of the less Defensive and/or more 
Offensive Robot based on the definitions and guidance in this game manual.
<GG16> You can’t force an opponent into a penalty.  Intentional strategies that cause an opponent to 
break a rule are not permitted, and will not result in a Violation for the opposing Alliance.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<GG17> No Holding for more than a 3-count.  A Robot may not Hold an opposing Robot for more than a 
3-count during the Driver Controlled Period.
For the purposes of this rule, a “count” is defined as an interval of time that is approximately one second in 
duration, and “counted out” by Head Referees verbally. A Holding count should begin immediately once the 
Head Referee observes a suspected Holding interaction. 

--- PAGE 48 ---

39
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
The Holding count should pause when at least one of the following conditions is met:
a. The two Robots are separated by at least two (2) feet (approximately one foam tile).
b. Either Robot has moved at least two (2) feet away (approximately one tile) from the location where the 
Trapping or Pinning count began.
i. In the case of Lifting, this location is measured from where the Lifted Robot is released, not from 
where the Lifting began.
c. The Holding Robot becomes Trapped or Pinned by a different Robot.
i. In this case, the original count would end, and a new count would begin for the newly Trapped or 
Pinned Robot.
d. In the case of Trapping, if an avenue of escape becomes available due to changing circumstances in the 
Match.
After a Holding count ends, a Robot may not resume Holding the same Robot again for a 5-count. If a Team 
resumes Holding the same Robot within that 5-count, the original Holding count will resume from where 
it ended. A Head Referee should use fingers to display the 5-count that occurs after the end of a Holding 
count, and “wave it off” after the Holding interaction has been cleared.
If two Robots are working together to Trap an opponent simultaneously, the Holding count can be applied 
to both Robots; it’s possible for them to legally take turns Trapping, but it’s risky.
If the Head Referee determines that a Robot is not attempting to escape, then it is not con -
sidered Pinned or Trapped. This commonly occurs when the Robot has malfunctioned and 
lost the ability to move, or when the Robot is defending a Field Element.
This criteria is not required for Lifting; the Holding status begins as soon as the opponent 
becomes Lifted.  
Holding is a standard and legal part of Head-to-Head game play, and only becomes a Viola-
tion if it exceeds the guidelines in this rule. By beginning a Holding count immediately after 
noticing a Holding interaction, and providing a visual signal when a Holding interaction has 
been cleared, Head Referees can help Teams avoid penalties.
Starting a Holding count is not, in and of itself, a declaration that Holding is occurring. 
Ending a Holding count early and waving it off is also not, in and of itself, an indication that 
Holding has occurred. There is no harm in a Head Referee reacting quickly with a Holding 
count, realizing that no Holding is occurring, and then ending and waving off the count.
During a Holding count, the Head Referee should continually verify that the interaction 
meets the definition of Holding. If it becomes clear that the interaction doesn’t meet the 
definition of Holding, the Head Referee should end the count early and wave off the Holding 
count. Holding only becomes a Violation if a referee exceeds a three-count before the 
Robots separate as described in rule <GG17>.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.

--- PAGE 49 ---

VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
40
<GG18> Use Scoring Objects to play the game.  Scoring Objects may not be used to accomplish actions 
that would be otherwise illegal if they were attempted by Robot mechanisms. If a rule is Violated through the 
use of a Scoring Objects instead of a Robot mechanism, it should be evaluated as though the rule in question 
had been Violated by a Robot mechanism. Examples include, but are not limited to:
 ● Interfering with an opponent’s Autonomous routine per <SG7>
 ● Using a Scoring Objects to intentionally tip or Entangle an opponent Robot
The intent of this rule is to prohibit Teams from using Scoring Objects as “gloves” to loophole any rule that 
states “a Robot may not [do some action].” This rule is not intended to be taken in its most extreme literal 
interpretation, where any interaction between a Scoring Object and a Robot needs to be scrutinized with the 
same intensity as if it were a Robot.

--- PAGE 50 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Section 3
Robot Skills

--- PAGE 51 ---

42
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Overview
Section 3 - Robot Skills
In Robot Skills Matches, Teams have one minute to score as many points as possible. There are two types 
of Robot Skills Matches : Driving Skills Matches , which are entirely Driver controlled, and Autonomous 
Coding Skills Matches , which are autonomous with limited human interaction. Teams are ranked based on 
their combined score in the two types of Robot Skills Matches.
Robot Skills Matches are optional for all Teams. Teams who do not compete in Robot Skills Matches will not 
be penalized in Teamwork Matches. However, participation in Robot Skills Matches may impact eligibility for 
judged awards at the event.
At events that include Teamwork Matches, Teams may only participate in Robot Skills Matches if they also 
participate in the Qualification Matches . See rule <T20>.
Robot Skills Challenge Rules
<RSC1> Standard rules apply in most cases.  All rules from previous sections apply to Robot Skills 
Matches, unless otherwise specified in this section.
a. Removing Scoring Objects from the Field in a Robot Skills Match is not a Violation. Scoring Objects that 
leave the Field cannot be returned.
b. In the Robot Skills Challenge, the standard definition of Match Affecting does not apply, because there 
is no winner or loser. When evaluating whether a rule Violation should be classified  as a Major Violation 
or Minor Violation in the context of this criteria, the term “score affecting” can be substituted for “ Match 
Affecting.” A Violation is considered “score affecting” if it results in a net increase of that Team’s score 
at the end of the Match.
c. Violations of <GG>, <SG>, and <RSC> rules that occur during a Robot Skills Match should only affect the 
outcome of that Match and should not be considered when determining whether a Violation has been 
repeated during the event.
<RSC2> Match play is different in Robot Skills Matches.
a. The Robot must start the Robot Skills Match in a legal starting position in the Quadrant adjacent to the 
red Alliance Station.
b. All Drive Team Members must remain in the red Alliance Station for the duration of the Match.
c. One red/yellow Pin must be used as a Preload in accordance with <SG5>.
d. Teams may only introduce Match Load Scoring Objects through red Alliance Loaders.
e. Robots can add or remove Pins or Cups on all Goals.
f. Robots may move freely about the Field after the start of the Match. 
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VURS3>.
<RSC3> Scoring Robot Skills Matches. For each Robot Skills Match, Teams are awarded a score based on 
the following rules and scoring table:
a. Teams can earn points for Pins of any color.

--- PAGE 52 ---

43
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
i. Red Pins only score points if they are Placed in a red Quadrant or in the Midfield.
ii. Blue Pins only score points if they are Placed in a blue Quadrant or in the Midfield.
iii. Toggles only confer Ownership of Pins if they match the color of their Quadrant (i.e., yellow Pins 
Placed in a red Quadrant with a Toggle that is set to blue will not earn any points). Yellow Pins that are 
not Owned do not score points.
iv. All yellow Pins Placed in the Midfield count for points.
v. A Pin in contact with a Robot at the end of the Match does not score points.
b. The Team will earn points for a Robot in the Midfield if the Robot meets the conditions of rule <SC6> at 
the end of the Match.
Each Red/Blue Pin Placed in a matching-color 
Quadrant or in the Midfield 5 points
Each Owned Yellow Pin Placed in a matching-color 
Quadrant or in the Midfield 10 points
Robot in the Midfield 8 points
<RSC4> Field setup for Skills Matches.  The Field is set up differently than a Head-to-Head Match, with the 
following modifications:
a. In Autonomous Coding Skills Matches , the VEX GPS code strip must be installed on the Field.
b. Revised Match Loads. Three (3) red/yellow Pins, four (4) blue/yellow Pins, and seven (7) Cups begin off 
the Field as Match Loads.
c. All Goals start the Match empty with no Placed Pins. 
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VURS1>.

--- PAGE 53 ---

44
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<RSC5> Skills Stop Time.  If a Team wishes to end their Robot Skills Match early, they may elect to record a 
Skills Stop Time. This is used as a tiebreaker for Robot Skills Challenge rankings. A Skills Stop Time does not 
affect a Team’s score for a given Robot Skills Match. Drive Team Members and field staff must agree prior to 
the Match on the signal that will be used to end the Match early.
a. Teams who intend to attempt a Skills Stop Time must “opt-in” by verbally confirming with the Scorekeep-
er Referee prior to the Robot Skills Match. If no notification is given prior to the start of the Match, then 
the Team forfeits their option to record a Skills Stop Time for that Match and they will receive a default 
Skills Stop Time of 0.
i. This conversation should include informing the Scorekeeper Referee which Drive Team Member will 
signal the stop. The Match may only be ended early by a Drive Team Member for that Match.
ii. If a Team runs multiple Robot Skills Matches in a row, they must reconfirm their Skills Stop Time 
choice with the Scorekeeper Referee prior to each Match.
iii. Any questions regarding a Skills Stop Time should be reviewed and settled immediately following the 
Match. <T1> and <T3> apply to Robot Skills Matches.
b. If the event is utilizing a V5 Robot Brain or the TM Mobile app for Robot Skills Challenge field control, a 
Drive Team Member may elect to start and stop their own Robot Skills Matches.
i. This V5 Robot Brain or other device running the TM Mobile app will be used to start the Robot Skills 
Matches (i.e., “enable” the Robot), end the Robot Skills Match (i.e., “Disable” the Robot), and display 
the official Skills Stop Time to be recorded.
ii. This V5 Robot Brain must be running the official field control user program.
Figure RSC4-1: An overhead view of a V5RC Override Robot Skills Match .

--- PAGE 54 ---

VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
45
iii.  For more information regarding the use of a V5 Robot Brain for Robot Skills Challenge field control, 
and to download the official field control user program, visit this VEX Knowledge Base article .
iv.  For more information regarding the use of TM Mobile for field control, see the Tournament Manager 
documentation .
c. At events which do not have a V5 Robot Brain or the TM Mobile App available for Robot Skills Challenge 
field control, Drive Team Members and field staff must agree prior to the Match on the signal that will 
be used to end the Match early. A manual timer must be used in conjunction with a VEXnet Competition 
Switch.
i. The moment when the Match ends early is defined as the moment when the Robot is “Disabled ” by 
the field control system. The time shown on the timer should be rounded up to the nearest second. 
For example, if the Robot is Disabled and the timer shows 25.2 seconds, then the Skills Stop Time 
should be recorded as 26.
ii. The agreed-upon signal must be both verbal and visual, such as Drive Team Members crossing their 
arms in an “X” or placing their V5 Controller(s) on the ground.
iii.  The signal must be given by a Drive Team Member who is standing in the Alliance Station.
iv.  It is recommended that Drive Team Members also provide verbal notice that they are approaching 
their Skills Stop Time, such as by counting out “3-2-1-stop.”
d. It is at the Event Partner’s discretion which method will be used to record Skills Stop Times at a given 
event. The chosen method must be communicated prior to the start of Matches (such as during an 
event meeting), and made equally available to all Teams.
i. If an event intends to use a manual timekeeping method, a Team cannot bring their own V5 Robot 
Brain just for use during their own Robot Skills Match.
ii. If an event intends to utilize a V5 Robot Brain, all Teams must use the same V5 Robot Brain for all 
Robot Skills Matches on a given Field.
iii.  If an event is using multiple Fields for Robot Skills Matches, the same method must be used at all 
Fields, as described in rule <T21> . Multiple V5 Robot Brains may be used as needed (e.g., a “Field 1 
Brain” and a “Field 2 Brain”).
iv.  The default timed “Drive” program accessed from a V5 Controller is intended for practice only, and 
cannot be used for an official Robot Skills Match.
e. If a Team chooses to utilize/record a Skills Stop Time, the 5-second grace period described in rule 
<SC1>  does not apply.

--- PAGE 55 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Section 4
The Robot

--- PAGE 56 ---

47
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Overview
Section 4 - The Robot
Inspection Rules
All Robots must pass inspection before competing in the VEX V5 Robotics Competition to ensure compli -
ance with all Robot rules. Inspections typically occur during Team check-in or practice time. Teams should 
use the rules below to pre-inspect their Robot and confirm it meets all requirements.
Most rules are hard limits (e.g., motor quantity), while others are subject to inspector discretion (e.g., safety 
concerns). At many events, the lead inspector and Head Referee are the same person; if not, inspectors 
should consult the Head Referee for judgment calls. Per <R2d> and <R2e>, the Head Referee has final 
authority on all Robot rules and whether a Robot may compete.
See this RECF Library article  for additional details on inspection and legal parts. Refer to Figure V-1 for 
guidance on handling inspection and CoC-related Violations.
<R1> One Robot per Team. Each Team can only bring one Robot to a given event in the VEX V5 Robotics 
Competition. Though it is expected that Teams will make changes to their Robot at the competition,  a 
Team is limited to only one Robot at a given event, and a given Robot may only be used by one Team. A VEX 
Robot, for the purposes of the VEX V5 Robotics Competition, has the following subsystems:
 ● Subsystem 1: Mobile robotic base including wheels, tracks, legs, or any other mechanism that allows the 
Robot to navigate the majority of the flat playing Field surface. For a stationary Robot, the robotic base 
without wheels would be considered Subsystem 1.
 ● Subsystem 2: Power and control system that includes a legal VEX battery, a legal VEX control system, 
and associated motors for the mobile robotic base.
 ● Subsystem 3: Additional mechanisms (and associated motors) that allow manipulation of Scoring 
Objects and interactions with Field Elements and other Robots.
Given the above definitions, a minimum Robot for use in any VEX V5 Robotics Competition event (including 
Robot Skills Matches) must consist of subsystems 1 and 2 above. Thus, if you swap out an entire subsys -
tem 1 or 2, you have created a second Robot and are in Violation this rule.
a. Teams may not compete with one Robot while a second is being modified or assembled at a 
competition.
b. Teams may not have an assembled second Robot on hand at a competition that is used to repair or 
swap parts with the first Robot.
c. Teams may not switch back and forth between multiple Robots during a competition. This includes 
using different Robots for Robot Skills Matches, Qualification Matches , and/or Elimination Matches .
d. Multiple Teams may not use the same Robot. Once a Robot has competed under a given Team number 
at an event, it is “their” Robot; no other Team may EVER compete with it.
The intent of <R1a>, <R1b>, and <R1c> is to ensure an unambiguous level playing field for all 
Teams. Teams are welcome (and encouraged) to improve or modify their Robots between 
events, or to collaborate with other Teams to develop the best possible game solution.
However, a Team who brings and/or competes with two separate Robots at the same 

--- PAGE 57 ---

48
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Tournament has diminished the efforts of a Team who spent extra design time making sure 
that their one Robot can accomplish all of the game’s tasks. A multi- Team organization that 
shares a single Robot has diminished the efforts of a multi- Team organization who puts in 
the time, effort, and resources to undergo separate individual design processes and develop 
their own Robots.
To help determine if a Robot is a “separate Robot” or not, use the subsystem definitions 
found in <R1>. Above that, use common sense as referenced in <G3>. If you can place two 
Robots on a table next to each other, and they look like two separate legal/complete Robots 
(i.e., each has the 3 subsystems defined by <R1>), then they are two Robots. Trying to decide 
if changing a screw, a wheel, or a microcontroller constitutes a separate Robot is missing the 
intent and spirit of this rule. Rules <G4> and <R2> still apply to both Robots.
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUR1>.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
<R2> Robots must pass inspection.  Every Robot will be required to pass a full inspection before being 
cleared to compete. This inspection will ensure that all Robot rules and regulations are met. Noncompliance 
with any Robot design or construction rule will result in removal from Matches or Disqualification  of the 
Robot at an event until the Robot is brought back into compliance, as described in the following subclauses.
a. Significant changes to a Robot, such as a partial or full swap of Subsystem 3, must be re-inspected 
before the Robot may compete again.
b. All possible functional Robot configurations must be inspected before being used in competition. This 
especially pertains to modular or swappable mechanisms (per <R1>) and Match starting configurations/
sizes (per <R3>).
c. Teams may be requested to submit to spot inspections by Head Referees. Refusal to submit will result in 
Disqualification .
i. If a Robot is determined to be in Violation of a Robot rule before a Match begins, the Robot will be 
removed from the Field. The Robot may remain at the Field so that the Team does not get assessed a 
“no-show” (per <GG2>).
d. Robots which have not passed inspection (i.e., that are in Violation of one or more Robot rules) will not be 
permitted to play in any Matches until they have passed inspection. <GG2> will apply to any Matches that 
occur until the Robot has passed inspection.
e. If a Robot has passed inspection, but is later confirmed to be in Violation of a Robot rule during or 
immediately following a Match by a Head Referee, they will be Disqualified from that Match. This is the 
only Match that will be affected; any prior Matches that have already been completed will not be revisited. 
<R3d> will apply until the Violation is remedied and the Team is re-inspected.
f. All inspection rules are to be enforced within the discretion of the Head Referee within a given event. 
Robot legality at one event does not automatically imply legality at future events. Robots which rely on 
“edge-case” interpretations of subjective rules, such as whether a decoration is “non-functional” or not, 
should expect additional scrutiny during inspection.
g. Events may wish to use “inspection markers” (e.g., zip tie or sticker) to identify Robots that have passed 

--- PAGE 58 ---

49
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
inspection at that event. Inspection markers are functional components and are subject to all Robot 
rules, including legal materials and Robot size/expansion limits.
h. Event staff and volunteers are allowed to contact and/or photograph Robots during inspection and/or at 
other times as needed.  
 
<R3> Robots must fit within an 18” x 18” x 18” volume.
a. Compliance with this rule may be checked using the official VEX Robotics On-Field Robot Expansion 
Sizing Tool.
b. Event Partners may construct and/or provide any sizing tool that measures the correct dimensions.
c. Any restraints used to maintain starting size (i.e., zip ties, rubber bands, etc.) must remain attached to 
the Robot for the duration of the Match, per <GG8>.
d. For the purposes of this rule, it can be assumed that Robots will be inspected and begin each Match on 
a flat standard foam field tile.  
The official sizing tool is intentionally manufactured with a slightly oversized tolerance. 
Therefore, any contact with the sizing tool (i.e., a “paper test”) while being measured should 
be considered a clear indication that a Robot is outside of the permitted size. This tolerance 
also provides a slight “leeway” for minor protrusions, such as screw heads or zip ties.
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUR1>.
<R4> Officially registered Team numbers must be displayed on Robot license plates.  To participate in 
an official VEX V5 Robotics Competition event, a Team must first register on RobotEvents.com and receive 
a V5RC Team number. This Team number must be displayed on the Robot using license plates. Teams may 
choose to use the official V5RC License Plate Kit, or may create their own using legal materials.
a. License plates must be placed in fixed locations on exactly two (2) horizontally opposing sides of the 
Robot and must remain visible, legible, and attached for the entirety of the Match. The top of a Robot is 
not considered a “side” for these two license plates.
i. License plates should be mounted in locations that remain stationary on the Robot during a Match 
(e.g., not on a rotating intake or flipping manipulator). The function of license plates is to identify 
Robots for referees, spectators, and other Teams. Identification is harder when a license plate on a 
Robot moves during a Match.
b. License plates must be securely attached to the Robot using materials that are legal for Robot con-
struction. VEX IQ pins are not legal for mounting license plates on Robots.
c. Robots may only include license plates that match their Alliance color for the current Match (i.e., red 
Alliance Robots must have only red plates installed for the Match).
d. License plates are considered functional components, and must meet the requirements of all Robot 
rules.
e. Additional license plates cannot be used on the Robot for any purpose.
f. Team numbers must be in white font, and clearly legible. Number/letter stickers are legal for use on 
license plates instead of or in addition to those in the V5RC License Plate Kit.

--- PAGE 59 ---

50
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
g. Custom license plates used to meet the requirements of <R4a> and <R4f> must be within the following 
size limits:
i. Height: between 2.0 (50.8mm) and 2.5 inches (63.5mm)
ii. Width: between 4.0 (101.6mm) and 4.5 inches (114.3mm)
iii. Thickness: up to 0.25” (6.35mm) 
Imagine the Robot as a cube that’s sitting flat on a flat surface. License plates should be 
placed onto two (2) opposing faces of that cube (excluding the top and bottom).
When a license plate is mounted to the Robot, only human influence should be able to 
remove the plate. The mounting should be secure enough to withstand any and all interac -
tions between the Robot and other things on the Field. Using rubber bands or other flexible 
mounting methods to mount license plates should not be considered secure, and should 
not pass inspection. Using screws and nuts/standoffs to mount plates is the best way to 
meet the requirements for securely mounted license plates. 
The intent of this rule is to make it immediately apparent to Head Referees and other event 
personnel which Alliance and which Team each Robot belongs to, at all times. It will be at the 
full discretion of the Head Referee and inspector at a given event to determine whether a 
given license plate satisfies the criteria listed in <R4>.
Teams who use custom plates should be especially prepared for the possibility of this 
judgment, and ensure that they are prepared to replace any custom parts with official VEX 
license plates if requested. Not bringing official replacement plates to an event will not be 
an acceptable reason for overlooking a Violation of one or more points in <R4>. Teams are 
encouraged to use an easily-read, sans-serif font (e.g., Arial).
If a Robot must be removed from the Field based on this rule, <R2ci> applies and the Team 
should not be issued a “no-show.”
Figure R4-1: An example of a license plate made from the V5RC License 
Plate Kit.
Figure R4-2: An example of a legal custom license plate
<R5> Let go of Scoring Objects after the Match.  Robots must be designed to permit easy removal of 
Scoring Objects from any mechanism without requiring the Robot to have power after a Match.

--- PAGE 60 ---

51
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<R6> Robots have one Brain. Robots must ONLY use one (1) VEX V5 Robot Brain (276-4810). Any other 
microcontrollers or processing devices are not allowed, even as non-functional decorations.
a. This includes microcontrollers that are part of other VEX product lines, such as VEX Cortex, VEX EXP, 
VEXpro, VEX CTE, VEX RCR, VEX IQ, VEX GO, VEX AIR, or VEX Robotics by HEXBUG. This also includes 
devices that are unrelated to VEX, such as Raspberry Pi or Arduino devices.
b. V5 Robot Brain accessories (short flanges, long flanges, and the magnetic screen protector) are part of 
the V5 Robot Brain and are only legal for use on Robots as part of the V5 Robot Brain.
c. At events using a V5 Smart Field Control System, the “Team Number” field in the Robot Brain must be set 
as the Team’s registered number and letter (with no spaces).  
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rules <VUR10> and <VUR12>.
<R7> Keep the power button or battery connection accessible.  The on/off button on the V5 Robot Brain 
and/or the Battery Cable connection on either the V5 Robot Brain or V5 Robot Battery must be accessible 
without moving or lifting the Robot. The V5 Brain screen should be easily visible during Robot inspection. 
Keeping the V5 Brain screen visible throughout a Match is recommended but not required.
This rule is in place to ensure the safety of both competitors and field staff. In the event that 
a Robot needs to be quickly powered off—whether due to a malfunction, Entanglement, 
or other safety concern—it is crucial that the power button and/or Robot Battery remains 
easily accessible. This allows competitors and/or field personnel to safely Disable the Robot 
without putting their hands near moving parts or other hazards inside the Robot.
Additionally, keeping screens and indicator lights visible helps officials diagnose issues effi -
ciently, minimizing downtime and ensuring a smooth competition experience. If the V5 Brain 
is accessible, Field volunteers can help Teams troubleshoot time-sensitive issues prior to a
Match, including switching between Bluetooth and VEXnet radio modes as needed, select -
ing programs on the V5 Brain in instances that prevent selection via the V5 Controller, etc. 
Teams will also have easier access during any needed <GG4a> interactions.
<R8> Firmware. Teams must use VEXos version 1.1.5 or newer, found at https://link.vex.com/firmware . 
Custom firmware modifications are not permitted.
a. The minimum version requirement is subject to change over the course of the season.
b. When the minimum version is updated, Teams have a one week (7 calendar day) grace period from the 
time the minimum version is changed to update their firmware to the latest minimum version.
c. VEX reserves the right to deem any firmware update critical, and remove the allowable grace period.
d. Beta firmware, which includes any firmware version that ends with the letter ‘b’, is not legal for use in 
competition.
<R9> Use a “Competition Template” for programming.  The Robot must be programmed to follow control 
directions provided by the VEXnet Field Controllers or Smart Field Control system.

--- PAGE 61 ---

52
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
During the Autonomous Period, Drive Team Members will not be allowed to use their V5 Controllers. As such, 
Teams are responsible for programming their Robot with custom software if they want to perform in the 
Autonomous Period.
This may be tested in inspection, where Robots may be required to pass a functional “enable/disable” test. 
For more information on this, Teams should consult the help guides produced by the developers of their 
chosen programming software.  
 
<R10> Motors are limited. Robots may use any combination of VEX V5 Smart Motors (11W) (276-4840) and 
V5 Smart Motors (5.5W) (276-4842), within the following criteria:
a. The combined power of all motors (11W & 5.5W) must not exceed 88W. This limit applies to all motors on 
the Robot, even those which are not plugged in.
b. V5 Smart Motors connected to Smart Ports are the only motors that may be used with a V5 Robot Brain. 
The 3-wire ports may not be used to control motors of any kind.
Example A B C D E
Qty of 11W motors 8 7 6 5 0
Qty of 5.5W motors 0 2 4 6 16
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUR11>.
<R11> Subsystem 1 (see <R1>) has a motor limit.  Robots may use any combination of VEX V5 Smart Motors  
(11W) (276-4840) and V5 Smart Motors (5.5W) (276-4842) in Subsystem 1, within the following criteria:
a. The combined power of all motors in Subsystem 1 must not exceed 55W.
b. Motors that are used in Subsystem 1 cannot provide power to any mechanism that is not a part of Sub -
system 1
i. Motors in Subsystem 1 cannot be toggled, engaged, or configured such that they are capable or 
providing power to any part of the Robot that is not a part of Subsystem 1. This includes, but is not 
limited, to power-takeoff mechanisms and/or differential power to other mechanisms/subsystems.
c. Teams may be required to demonstrate what each motor is capable of powering on their Robot during 
inspection in order to satisfy this requirement.
<R12> Electrical power comes from VEX batteries only.  Robots may use one (1) V5 Robot Battery (276-
4811) to power the V5 Robot Brain.
a. No other sources of electrical power are permitted, unless used as part of a non-functional decoration 
per <R23e>.
b. There are no legal power expanders for the V5 Robot Battery.
c. V5 Robot Batteries may only be charged by a V5 Robot Battery Charger (276-4812 or 276-4841).
d. V5 Controllers (276-4820) may only be powered by their internal rechargeable battery.

--- PAGE 62 ---

53
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
i. Teams are permitted to have an external power source (such as a rechargeable battery pack) 
plugged into their V5 Controller during a Match, provided that this power source is connected safely 
and does not violate any other rules, such as <R28>.
ii. Some events may choose to provide Field power for V5 Controllers. If this is provided for all Teams 
at the event, then this is a legal power source for the V5 Controllers.  
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUR12>.
 
 
<R13> Robots use VEXnet.  Robots must ONLY utilize the VEXnet system for all wireless Robot 
communication.
a. Electronics from the Cortex, VEX EXP, VEX CTE. VEXpro, VEX RCR, VEXplorer, VEX IQ, VEX GO, or VEX 
Robotics by HEXBUG product line are prohibited unless otherwise noted in <R16>.
b. Teams are permitted to use the Bluetooth® capabilities of the V5 Robot Brain and/or V5 Controller in 
Team pits, practice Fields, and Robot Skills Matches. However, VEXnet must be used for wireless com -
munication during Head-to-Head Matches.
c. Teams are permitted to use the Wi-Fi capabilities of the Vision Sensor in Team pits or outside of 
Matches. However, the Vision Sensor must have its wireless transmitting functionality disabled during 
Matches. 
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rules <VUR2>, <VUR10> and <VUR12>.
 
<R14> Give the radio some space.  The V5 Radio should be mounted such that no metal surrounds the 
radio symbol on the V5 Radio. While failure to do so will affect Robot performance, it will not prevent the 
Robot from passing inspection.
It is fine to loosely encapsulate the V5 Radio within Robot structure. The intent of this rule is 
to minimize radio connection issues by minimizing obstructions between VEXnet devices. 
Burying a radio deep within a Robot may result in Robot communication issues. It is also 
recommended that the LEDs on the radio be visible to aid in troubleshooting.
 
<R15> One or two Controllers per Robot.  No more than two (2) VEX V5 Controllers may control a single 
Robot.
a. No physical or electrical modification of these Controllers is allowed under any circumstances.
i. Attachments which assist the Drive Team Member in holding or manipulating buttons/joysticks on 
the V5 Controller are permitted, provided that they do not involve direct physical or electrical modifi -
cation of the Controller itself.
b. No other methods of controlling the Robot (light, sound, etc.) are permissible.
i. Using sensor feedback to augment driver control (such as motor encoders or the Vision Sensor) is 
permitted.

--- PAGE 63 ---

54
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<R16> Robots are built from the VEX V5 system.  Robots may be built ONLY using official VEX
V5 components, unless otherwise specifically noted within these rules.
a. All legal parts for the V5 system are listed in the V5 Competition Legal Parts List .
b. Any questions or concerns about legal parts should be directed to the official Q&A System on RobotE -
vents.com. 
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUR2>.
 
 
<R17> New VEX parts are legal.  Additional VEX components released during the competition season on 
www.vexrobotics.com are considered legal for use unless otherwise noted.
Some “new” components may have certain restrictions placed on them upon their release. These restrictions 
will be documented in the official Q&A, in a Game Manual update, or in the VEX V5 Legal Parts List.
<R18> Prohibited Items. The following types of mechanisms and components are NOT allowed.
a. Those that could potentially damage Field Elements or Scoring Objects.
b. Those that could potentially damage other competing Robots.
c. Those that pose an unnecessary risk of Entanglement with other Robots or Field Elements.
d. Those that could pose a potential safety hazard to Drive Team Members, event staff, or other humans.
e. Products from the VEXpro, VEX EXP, VEX IQ, VEX GO, VEX 123, VEX CTE, VEX AIM, VEX AIR, VEX Robotics 
by HEXBUG*, or any other VEX product lines, unless specifically allowed by a clause of <R16> or listed in 
the VEX V5 Legal Parts List (See <R16>).
f. Components obtained from the V5 beta program. All V5 beta hardware can be identified by its lighter gray 
pre-production color. Robot Brains, Robot Batteries, Controllers, and Vision Sensors from the V5 beta have 
a “BETA TEST” stamp on them. Smart Motors and Radios do not have this stamp, but can still be identified 
by color.
g. Standalone VEX Smart Field Controller Brains (SKU 276-7577).
h. VEX apparel, competition support materials, packaging, or other non- Robot products.
i. Field Elements or components of Field Elements that are not otherwise explicitly legal materials (e.g., 
screws, standoffs, nuts, or non-shattering plastic within the limitations of <R24>).
j. 3D printed Robot parts for any purpose, including non-functional decorations and license plates.
k. Speakers and other audio devices that create sound.
3D printed Controller attachments, 3D printed Robot alignment tools, and/or other custom 3D 
printed tools that do not go onto the Robot or into the Field during a Match are not considered 
Robot parts, and may be legal for use if they meet the requirements of other pertinent rules.
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rules <VUR2>, <VUR5>, <VUR6>, & <VUR13>.
* The HEXBUG brand is a registered trademark belonging to Spin Master Corp
 

--- PAGE 64 ---

55
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<R19> Certain non-VEX components are allowed.  Robots are allowed the following additional compo -
nents from sources other than VEX Robotics:
a. Any non-aerosol-based grease or lubricating compound, when used in extreme moderation on surfaces 
and locations that do NOT contact the playing Field walls, foam Field tiles, Scoring Objects, or other 
Robots. Grease or lubricant applied directly to V5 Smart Motors or Smart Motor cartridges is prohibited.
b. Anti-static compound, when used in extreme moderation (i.e., such that it does not leave residue on 
Field Elements, Scoring Objects, or other Robots).
c. Hot glue when used to secure cable connections.
d. An unlimited amount of non-elastic rope/string, no thicker than 1/4” (6.35mm).
e. Commercially available items used solely for bundling or wrapping of 2-wire, 3-wire, 4-wire, or V5 Smart 
Cables, and/or pneumatic tubing are allowed. These items must solely be used for the purposes of 
cable/tubing protection, organization, or management. This includes but is not limited to electrical tape, 
cable carrier, cable track, etc. It is up to inspectors to determine whether a component is serving a 
function beyond protecting and managing cables and tubing.
f. Rubber bands no larger than 7.5” long and 0.25” wide.
g. Anti-slip drawer liner with similar nominal dimensions to VEX Anti-Slip Mat (275-0120 or 275-0121). The 
pattern of the matting should be similar to VEX Anti-Slip Mat, and there should be no additional perfor -
mance gained by using non-VEX anti-slip drawer liner (i.e., no additional elasticity, adhesive backing, 
etc.). No piece of anti-slip drawer liner can be larger than 12” x 15” and all anti-slip drawer liner must be 
black in color. 
h. Plastic zip ties no larger than 12” long and 0.25” wide. 
i. A Micro SD card installed in the V5 Robot Brain.
j. Aerosol-based cooling/freeze spray may be used to assist in cooling motors. Teams using freeze spray 
or similar products in ways that may reasonably be deemed unsafe could be subject to <S1> Violations.
k. Cleaners, disinfectants, and/or sanitizers may be used to assist in cleaning Robots, parts, components, 
etc. 
l. See rules <R21> through <R25> for additional legal non-VEX components.  
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rules <VUR3>, <VUR4>, <VUR7>, <VUR8>, 
<VUR9>, <VUR12>, <VUR14> & <VUR15>.
<R20> Custom V5 Smart Cables are allowed.  Teams who create custom cables acknowledge that incor -
rect wiring may have undesired results.
a. Official V5 Smart Cable Stock must be used.
b. Use of non-VEX 4P4C connectors and 4P4C crimping tools is permissible.
c. V5 Smart Cables may only be used for connecting legal electronic devices to the V5 Robot Brain.

--- PAGE 65 ---

56
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<R21> A limited amount of tape is allowed.  Robots may use a small amount of tape for the following 
purposes:
a. To secure any connection between the ends of two (2) VEX cables.
b. To label wires, motors, Robot Brains, and/or controllers.
c. To prevent leaks on the threaded portions of pneumatic fittings. This is the only acceptable use of 
Teflon tape.
d. In any other application that would be considered a “decoration” per <R23>.
e. As an aglet at the end of rope/string to prevent fraying.
 
 
<R22> Certain non-VEX fasteners are allowed.  Robots may use the following commercially available 
hardware:
a. #4, #6, #8, M3, M3.5, or M4 screws up to 2.5” (63.5 mm) long, and M2.5 x 8mm screws.
b. Shoulder screws with a shoulder length no longer than 0.20” and a diameter no larger than 0.176”.
c. Any commercially available nut, washer, threaded standoff up to 6” (152.4mm) long, and/or non-thread -
ed spacer up to 2.5” (63.5mm) long which fits these screws.  
The intent of the rule is to allow Teams to purchase their own commodity hardware without 
introducing additional functionality not found in standard VEX equipment. It is up to inspec -
tors to determine whether the non-VEX hardware has introduced additional functionality or 
not.
For the purposes of this rule, weight savings is not considered additional functionality.
If a key component of a Robot’s design relies upon convincing an inspector that a special -
ized component is “technically a screw,” it is probably outside of the spirit and intent of this 
rule.
All specific dimensions listed in this rule are intended to be ‘nominal’ references to 
hardware sizes found within the VEX V5 product line and/or their metric equivalents.
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUR9>.
 
<R23> Visual decorations are allowed.  Teams may add non-functional decorations, provided that they do 
not affect Robot performance in any significant way or affect the outcome of the Match. These decorations 
must be in the spirit of the competition. Inspectors and Head Referees will have final say in what is consid -
ered “non-functional.” Unless otherwise specified below, non-functional decorations are governed by all 
standard Robot rules.
To be considered “non-functional,” decorations must be backed by legal materials that provide the same 
functionality. For example, if a Robot has a giant decal that prevents Scoring Objects from falling out of the 
Robot, the decal must be backed by VEX material that would also prevent the Scoring Objects from falling 
out. A simple way to check this is to determine if removing the decoration would impact the performance of 
the Robot in any way.

--- PAGE 66 ---

57
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
a. Anodizing, painting, dyeing or changing the color of any legal VEX part is prohibited.
b. Small cameras are permitted as non-functional decorations, provided that any transmitting functions or 
wireless communications are disabled. Unusually large cameras used as ballast are not permitted.
c. VEX electronics may not be used as non-functional decorations.
d. Decorations that visually mimic Field Elements or Scoring Objects are not permitted. The inspector and 
Head Referee will make the final decision on whether a given decoration or mechanism violates this rule.
i. Decorations cannot be designed to intentionally interfere with opponent Vision or Color Sensors. 
Teams will be asked to remove these decorations if the inspector or Head Referee determines that it 
interferes with opponent systems.
e. Decorations which provide feedback to a Robot (e.g., by influencing legal sensors) would be considered 
“functional,” and are not permitted.
f. Decorations that cover or obscure identifying features of electronics and/or pneumatics parts are not 
legal.
i. Teams will be asked to either replace the electronics and/or pneumatics part entirely, or remove the 
decoration if possible.
ii. Identifying features include, but are not limited to, VEX logos, part numbers, and other distinctive 
colors or features of the part that allow an inspector to easily confirm it is a legal part.
<R24> A limited amount of custom plastic is allowed.  Robots may use custom-made pieces cut from 
certain types of non-shattering plastic, up to 0.070” thick.
a. Each Robot is limited to a maximum of 12 individual pieces cut from non-shattering plastic. This includes 
non-shattering plastic used in non-functional decorations.
b. Each individual piece of non-shattering plastic cannot be larger than 4” x 8” x 0.070”.
c. Teams must present and display ALL non-shattering plastic parts during inspection.
i. Inspectors will verify the total number of plastic pieces. They may use dry-erase markers or other 
forms of temporary marking to aid in counting.
ii. Inspectors will verify that no non-shattering piece exceeds the size limitation.
d. Plastic may be mechanically altered by cutting, drilling, bending, etc. It cannot be chemically treated, 
melted, cast, or bonded to another part. Heating non-shattering plastic to aid in bending is acceptable.
e. Legal plastic types are polycarbonate (Lexan), acetal monopolymer (Delrin), acetal copolymer (Acetron 
GP), POM (acetal), ABS, PEEK, PET, HDPE, LDPE, nylon (all grades), polypropylene, PTFE, and FEP.
f. Shattering plastic, such as PMMA (also called plexiglass, acrylic, or perspex), is prohibited.
g. Plastic sheets sold by VEX (such as the 276-8340 PET Sheets) are considered custom plastic in the 
context of this rule, and are subject to the same limitations as other plastic parts. 
h. This rule does not apply to 3D printed plastic parts. 3D printed Robot parts are not permitted in the VEX 
V5 Robotics Competition for any purpose, including non-functional decorations.

--- PAGE 67 ---

58
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Note: Teams are strongly encouraged to provide inspectors with 1:1 scale drawings, identical spares, 
or 1:1 scale tracings of their non-shattering plastic pieces to aid in inspection. Drawings and tracings 
should accurately reflect ALL shapes and dimensions of each piece. Complex bent/cut parts, and 
parts that are cut diagonally across a 4”x8” sheet to gain length may require more evidence.  
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rules <VUR3> & <VUR4>.
This rule has additional Violation notes. See Appendix C.
 
 
<R25> Pneumatics are limited.  A Robot’s pneumatic subsystem must satisfy all of the following criteria:
a. Teams may use a maximum of two (2) VEX Air Tanks (276-8749) on a Robot. 
b. Pneumatic devices may be charged to a maximum of 100 psi.
c. The compressed air contained inside a pneumatic subsystem can only be used to actuate legal pneu -
matic devices (e.g., cylinders).  
The intent of <R25a> and <R25b> is to limit Robots to the air pressure stored in two reser-
voir tanks, as well as the normal working air pressure contained in their pneumatic cylinders 
and tubing on the Robot. Teams may not use other elements for the purposes of storing or 
generating air pressure.
Using cylinders or additional pneumatic tubing solely for additional storage is a Violation 
of the spirit of this rule. Similarly, using pneumatic cylinders and/or tubing without any air 
reservoirs is also a Violation of the spirit of this rule.
The intent of <R25c> is to ensure that pneumatics are being used safely. Pressurized 
systems, such as a Robot’s pneumatic subsystem, have the potential to be dangerous 
if used incorrectly. This rule ensures the safety of participants, and prevents potentially 
unsafe uses in the future.
Another way of thinking of <R25c> is that “pneumatics should only be used with pneumat -
ics.” Teams should not use compressed air as a means of actuating non-pneumatic devices 
such as screws, nuts, etc. For example, pulling a pin with a pneumatic cylinder is okay, but 
using air to actuate the pin itself is not.
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rule <VUR14>.
 
 
<R26> The VEX Pressure Gauge (276-8748) is a required part if a Robot includes pneumatics.  
a. The gauge must be plumbed to the high pressure side of the system if the Team is using a regulator. 
b. The pressure gauge must be visible and readable by referees and inspectors without moving or 
removing other Robot components or mechanisms. 
c. The pressure gauge will be used to verify that the pneumatics system is charged to no more than 
100psi, per <R25>.
i. The VEX Pressure Gauge on the Robot will take precedence over any off-board measurement.

--- PAGE 68 ---

VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
59
<R27> Most modifications to non-electrical components are allowed.  Physical modifications, such as 
bending or cutting, of legal metal structure or plastic components are permitted.
a. Modifying the arm of limit switches (by bending or trimming) or removing the rubber cap of bumper 
switches is permitted.
b. Metallurgical modifications that change fundamental material properties, such as heat treating or 
melting, are not permitted.
c. Pneumatic tubing may be cut to desired lengths.
d. Fusing/melting the end of legal nylon rope/string (see <R19d>) to prevent fraying is permitted.
e. Welding, soldering, brazing, gluing, or attaching parts to each other in any way that is not provided 
within the VEX platform is not permitted. Rule <R19c> is an exception to this rule.
f.  Mechanical fasteners may be secured using Loctite or a similar thread-locking product. This may ONLY 
be used for securing hardware, such as screws and nuts.  
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See Rules <VUR3>, <VUR12> & <VUR13>.
 
 
<R28> No modifications to electronic or pneumatic components are allowed.  Motors (including the V5 
Smart Motor firmware), microcontrollers (including V5 Robot Brain firmware), cables, sensors, controllers, 
battery packs, reservoirs, solenoids, pneumatic cylinders, and any other electrical or pneumatics compo -
nent of the VEX platform may NOT be altered from their original state in ANY way.
a. Teams may make the following modifications to the V5 Smart Motor (11W)’s user-serviceable features. 
This list is all-inclusive; no other modifications are permitted. Where applicable, the components listed 
below (in the specific applications listed below) are permissible exceptions to <R19> .
i. Replacing the gear cartridge with other official cartridges.
ii. Removing or replacing the screws from the V5 Smart Motor Cap (276-6780).
iii.  Removing or replacing the threaded mounting inserts (276-6781).
iv.  Aesthetic/non-functional labeling (e.g., markers, stickers, paint, etc.).
b. V5 Smart Motors (11W) must use an official VEX V5 gear cartridge. For the purposes of this rule, the 
gear cartridges found within the V5 Smart Motor are considered “part of the motor.” Therefore, any 
physical or functional modifications to official gear cartridges is not permitted. V5 Smart Motors (11W) 
may only use official VEX motor cartridges
c. For the purposes of this rule, the V5 Smart Motor Cap is not considered “part of the motor.” Therefore, 
<R27>  applies.
d. External wires on VEX 2-wire or 3-wire electrical components may be repaired by soldering or using 
twist/crimp connectors, electrical tape, or shrink tubing such that the original functionality and length 
are not modified in any way.
i. Wire used in repairs must be identical to VEX wire.
ii. Teams make these repairs at their own risk; incorrect wiring may have undesired results.
e. V5 Robot Brain accessories (short flanges, long flanges, and the magnetic screen protector) are consid -
ered “part of the V5 Robot Brain” and cannot be modified.

--- PAGE 69 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Section 5
The Tournament

--- PAGE 70 ---

61
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Overview
Section 5 - The Tournament
Tournament Rules
The VEX V5 Robotics Competition consists of Head-to-Head Matches, Robot Skills Matches, and optional 
judging (as described in the RECF Guide to Judging). This section describes how Head-to-Head Matches 
and Robot Skills Matches are to be played at a given event. For information about the requirements for 
Tournaments that qualify Teams to championship events, visit this article in the RECF Library .
Awards may be given to top Teams in each format, as applicable. Awards may also be given for overall 
performance in the judged criteria. Please review the article Guide to Judging: Awards in the RECF Library 
for more details.
<T1> Head Referees have ultimate and final authority on all gameplay and Robot ruling decisions 
during the competition.
a. Scorekeeper Referees score the Match, and may serve as observers or advisers for Head Referees, but 
may not determine any Violations directly.
b. When issuing a Major Violation or Minor Violation to a Team, Head Referees must provide the rule 
number of the specific rule that has been Violated, and must record the Violation on the Match Anomaly 
Log.
c. CoC-related Violations  require additional escalation beyond the Head Referee’s initial ruling, including 
(but not limited to) investigation by RECF representatives.
d. Event Partners may not overrule a Head Referee’s gameplay or Robot decisions.
e. Every Qualification Match  and Elimination Match must be watched by a certified Head Referee. A Head 
Referee may only watch one Match at a time; if multiple Matches are happening simultaneously on 
separate Fields, each Field must have its own Head Referee. Head Referees must follow the rules in this 
game manual and the Q&A, and must make rulings consistent with the intent of the game manual and 
Q&A.
f. At a minimum, every Robot Skills Match must be watched by a trained Scorekeeper Referee, who may 
only watch one Match at a time. If multiple Robot Skills Matches are happening simultaneously on 
separate Fields, each Field must have its own Scorekeeper Referee. A certified Head Referee must be 
available at the event to explain a rule, Disqualification , Violation, or other penalty to Teams in Robot 
Skills Matches as needed in support of the Scorekeeper Referees at skills Fields.
Note from the VEX GDC: The rules contained in this Game Manual are written to be 
enforced by human Head Referees. Many rules have “black-and-white” criteria that can be 
easily checked. However, some rulings will rely on a judgment call from this human Head 
Referee. In these cases, Head Referees will make their calls based on what they and the 
Scorekeeper Referees saw, what guidance is provided by their official support materials 
(the Game Manual and the Q&A), and most crucially, the context of the Match in question.
The VEX V5 Robotics Competition does not have video replay, our Fields do not have 
absolute sensors to count scores, and most events do not have the resources for an exten -
sive review conference between each Match.

--- PAGE 71 ---

62
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
When an ambiguous rule results in a controversial call, there is a natural instinct to wonder 
what the “right” ruling “should have been,” or what the Game Design Committee  “would 
have ruled.” This is ultimately an irrelevant question; our answer is that when a rule speci -
fies “Head Referee’s discretion” (or similar), then the “right” call is the one made by a Head 
Referee in the moment. The VEX GDC designs games, and writes rules, with this expecta -
tion (constraint) in mind.
<T2> Head Referees must be qualified.  V5RC Head Referees must have all of the following qualifications:
a. Be at least 20 years of age.
b. Be approved by the Event Partner.
c. Be an RECF Certified V5RC Head Referee for the current season. Visit the RECF Library for more details.
d. Cannot be the Event Partner or a Judge Advisor for the event.  
Note: Scorekeeper Referees must be at least 15 years of age, and must be approved by the Event 
Partner.
Head Referees should demonstrate the following attributes:
 ● Thorough knowledge of the current game and rules of play
 ● Effective decision-making skills
 ● Attention to detail
 ● Ability to work effectively as a member of a team
 ● Ability to be confident and assertive when necessary
 ● Strong communication and diplomacy skills
<T3> Drive Team Members are permitted to immediately appeal a Head Referee’s ruling.  If Drive Team 
Members wish to dispute a score or ruling, they must stay in the Alliance Station until the Head Referee 
from the Match talks with them. The Head Referee may then choose to meet with the Drive Team Members 
at another location and/or at a later time so that the Head Referee has time to reference materials or 
resources to help with the decision. Once the Head Referee announces that their decision has been made 
final, the issue is over and no more appeals may be made (See rule <T1>); failure to accept this final decision 
may be considered a <G1> Violation. There is no system or opportunity for an appeal of the Head Referee’s 
final decision, either at or after the event.
a. Referees are not permitted to review any photo or video Match recordings when determining a score 
or ruling.  Some events may also prohibit Drive Team Members from reviewing photo or video Match 
recordings while in the Alliance Station ; this should be announced to all Teams before Matches start.
b. Head Referees are the only individuals permitted to explain a rule, Disqualification , Violation, or other 
penalty to the Teams in a Head-to-Head Match. Teams should never consult other field personnel, 
including Scorekeeper Referees, regarding a ruling clarification.

--- PAGE 72 ---

63
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Communication and conflict resolution skills are an important life skill for Students to practice and learn. 
In the VEX V5 Robotics Competition, we expect Students to practice proper conflict resolution using the 
proper chain of command. Violations of this rule may be considered a Violation of <G1> and/or the Code of 
Conduct.
Some events may choose to utilize a “question box” or other designated location for dis -
cussions with Head Referees. Offering a “question box” is within the discretion of the Event 
Partner and/or Head Referee, and may act as an alternate option for asking Drive Team 
Members to remain in the Alliance Station (although all other aspects of this rule apply).
However, by using this alternate location, Drive Team Members acknowledge that they are 
forfeiting the opportunity to use any contextual information involving the specific state of 
the Field at the end of the Match. For example, it is impossible to appeal whether a Scoring 
Object was scored or not if the Field has already been reset. If this information is pertinent 
to the appeal, Drive Team Members should still remain in the Alliance Station, and only 
relocate to the “question box” once the Head Referee has been made aware of the concern 
and/or any relevant context.
<T4> The Event Partner has ultimate authority regarding all non-gameplay decisions during an event.  
The Game Manual is intended to provide a set of rules for successfully playing V5RC Override; it is not 
intended to be an exhaustive compilation of guidelines for running a VEX V5 Robotics Competition event. 
Rules such as, but not limited to, the following examples are at the discretion of the Event Partner and 
should be treated with the same respect as the Game Manual.
 ● Venue access
 ● Pit spaces
 ● Health and safety
 ● Team registration and/or competition eligibility
 ● Team conduct away from competition Fields 
This rule exists alongside <G1>, <S1>, and <G3>. Even though there isn’t a rule that says “do 
not steal from the concession stand,” it would still be within an Event Partner’s authority to 
remove a thief from the competition.
<T5> Be prepared for minor Field variance.  Field Element tolerances and Scoring Objects may vary from 
specified locations/dimensions; Teams are encouraged to design their Robots accordingly. Please make 
sure to check Appendix A for more specific nominal dimensions and tolerances.
a. Field Element tolerances may vary from nominal by up to ±1.0”.
b. Scoring Object placement at the beginning of the Match may vary from nominal by up to ±1” (25.4mm). If 
a Scoring Object is within tolerance, it should not be adjusted before the Match.
c. The rotation of Scoring Objects is not specified. If a Scoring Object is within tolerance, either on the 
Field or within a Loader, it should not be adjusted before the Match.

--- PAGE 73 ---

64
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
The Field Perimeter and Field Elements are designed to be assembled and disassembled multiple times 
each year. Event Partners store and transport Fields between events, and the individuals setting up the 
Field at one event may differ from those at the next. While every effort will be made to ensure minimal 
variance, Teams should expect that any Field may be slightly different than another, and prepare according -
ly. Just because something works on one Field does not fully guarantee it will work on the next, and is not 
enough evidence alone to determine if a Field is out of tolerance.
<T6> Fields may be repaired at the Event Partner’s discretion.  All competition Fields at an event must be 
set up in accordance with the specifications in Appendix A and/or other applicable Sections. Minor aesthet -
ic customizations or repairs are permitted, provided that they do not impact gameplay (see <T4>).
Examples of permissible modifications include, but are not limited to:
 ● Applying threadlocker to Field Element mounting hardware
 ● Using non-VEX electrical tape to add required lines to the Field
 ● Anchoring Field Elements directly to Field risers instead of the metal plates
 ● Anchoring the metal plates to the underlying surface with hardware or tape
 ● Utilizing a non-VEX Strap under the Field to tie walls together
 ● Parts added to the exterior of the Portable Field Perimeter to assist in assembly, transportation, and 
rigidity during Matches
Modifications that may impact Robot functionality and/or how the game is played are generally not allowed. 
Examples of prohibited modifications include, but are not limited to:
 ● Unofficial Field Perimeter walls, additional structural elements inside of the Field Perimeter, or unofficial/
replica Field Elements
 ● Additional VEX structural parts attached to a Field Element
 ● Replacing the opaque Field walls on the VEX Portable Competition Field Perimeter with transparent 
panels
 ● Assembling a VEX Portable Competition Field Perimeter without including the securing straps
 ● Affixing stickers to the foam Field Tiles or otherwise marking object placements for Field reset
Any specific repairs and/or modifications which pertain to the current season’s game will be documented in 
this rule and Appendix A, as needed.
<T7> Fields at an event must be consistent with each other.  There are many types of permissible 
aesthetic and/or logistical modifications that may be made to competition Fields at the Event Partner’s 
discretion (see <T6>). If an event has multiple Head-to-Head competition Fields, they must all incorporate 
the same permissible/applicable modifications. If an event has multiple Robot Skills Challenge Fields, they 
must all incorporate the same permissible modifications. For example, if one Head-to-Head competition 
Field is elevated, then all Head-to-Head competition Fields must be elevated to the same height.
Examples of these modifications may include, but are not limited to:

--- PAGE 74 ---

65
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
 ● Elevating the playing Field off of the floor (common heights are 12” to 24” [30.5cm to 61cm])
 ● Field control systems (see <T8>)
 ● Field display monitors
 ● Field Perimeter decorations (e.g., LED lights, sponsor decals on polycarbonate panels)
 ● Field Perimeter type (see <T9>)
 ● Utilizing the VEX GPS Field Code Strips
 ● Utilizing non-VEX Straps to hold the Field walls together 
Note: If an event has dedicated Fields for Robot Skills Matches , there is no requirement for them to 
have the same consistent modifications as the Head-to-Head Fields. See <T21> for more details.
<T8> There are three types of Field control that may be used.
1. A VEXnet Field Controller controlled by Tournament Manager, which connects to a Controller’s competi -
tion port via ethernet cable.
2. A V5 Event Brain controlled by Tournament Manager, which connects to a Controller via Smart Cable.
3. A VEXnet Competition Switch, which connects to a Controller’s competition port via Cat-5 cable, may only 
be used in Practice Matches, Robot Skills Matches, and Leagues, and only under extreme circumstances.
If an event has multiple Fields, then all Fields of the same game type must use the same control system, in 
accordance with <T 7> and <T21>. For example, it would be permissible for Head-to-Head competition Fields 
to use V5 Event Brains, and for Skills Challenge Fields to use VEXnet Field Controllers. However, it would not 
be permissible for one Head-to-Head Field to use a V5 Event Brain while another Head-to-Head Field uses a 
VEXnet Field Controller.
Note: Official Qualifying Events may only use the official, unmodified version of Tournament Manager 
for field control, along with approved hardware and networking solutions found in the RECF Library. 
Add-ons that abide by the TM Public API guidelines are permitted. Once add-ons are enabled, the 
software is no longer supported by the REC Foundation, VEX Robotics, or DWAB Technologies; any 
necessary troubleshooting will be done at the user’s own risk.
<T9> There are two types of Field Perimeter that may be used.
1. VEX Metal Competition Field Perimeter (SKU 278-1501).
2. VEX Portable Competition Field Perimeter (SKU 276-8242).
See Appendix A for more details.
If an event has multiple Fields, then all Fields of the same game type must use the same Field Perimeter type, 
in accordance with <T 7> and <T21>. For example, it would be permissible for Head-to-Head competition Fields 
to use metal Field Perimeters, and for Skills Challenge Fields to use Portable Field Perimeters.  
 
However, it would not be permissible for one Head-to-Head Field to use a metal Field Perimeter, while other 
Head-to-Head Fields use Portable Field Perimeters.

--- PAGE 75 ---

66
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<T10> Qualification Matches follow the Match Schedule.  A Qualification Match Schedule will be available 
on the day of competition. The Match Schedule will indicate Alliance partners, Match pairings, and Alliance 
colors for each Match. For Tournaments with multiple Fields, the schedule will indicate which Field each 
Match will take place on. 
a. Practice Matches may be included in the Match Schedule at some events, but are not required. If 
Practice Matches are run, every effort will be made to equalize practice time for all Teams.
b. A Qualification Match  can only start before its scheduled time if all Teams, Robots, and assigned volun-
teers are at the Field and ready to play.
c. Any multi-division event must be approved by the REC Foundation Regional Support Manager  prior to 
the event, and divisions must be assigned in sequential order by Team number.
d. The Match Schedule is subject to change at the Event Partner’s discretion. Events should generally wait 
to generate the Match Schedule until all Teams have checked in and passed Robot Inspection, or when 
it has been confirmed that Teams will not be participating.
e. If the RECF Regional Support Manager  determines that a Team should be removed from further 
Matches at the event based on the outcome of a CoC-related Violation, the Event Partner can use the 
full-event Disqualification  feature in TM to remove that Team from all further Matches at the event. Their 
spots in later Qualification Matches  will be replaced automatically by Teams from the end of the Match 
Schedule, and Matches will be removed from the end of the schedule as appropriate.
<T11> Each Team will have at least six Qualification Matches.
a. A Tournament must include a minimum of six Qualification Matches  per Team at local qualifying events 
or eight Qualification Matches  per Team at a Championship event. The recommended number of Qualifi-
cation Matches per Team is eight for a standard Tournament, and up to ten for a championship event.
b. A league must include at least three league ranking sessions, with at least one week between sessions. 
Each session must include a minimum of two Qualification Matches  per Team at that session. The 
suggested number of Qualification Matches  per Team for a standard league ranking session is four. 
Leagues will have a championship session where elimination rounds will be played. Event Partners may 
also choose to have Qualification Matches  as part of their championship session.
<T12> Qualification Matches contribute to a Team’s ranking for Alliance Selection.
a. When in a Tournament, every Team will be ranked based on the same number of Qualification Matches .
b. For Tournaments that have more than one division, Teams will be ranked among all Teams in their 
specific division. 
c. When in a league, every Team will be ranked based on the number of Matches played. Teams that par-
ticipate in at least 60% of the total Matches available will be ranked above Teams that participate in less 
than 60% of the total Matches available; e.g., if the league offers 3 ranking sessions with 4 Qualification 
Matches per Team, Teams that participate in 8 or more Matches will be ranked higher than Teams who 
participate in 7 or fewer Matches. Being a no-show to a Match that a Team is scheduled in still consti -
tutes participation for these calculations.

--- PAGE 76 ---

67
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
d. In some cases, a Team will be asked to play an additional Qualification Match . The extra Match will be 
identified on the Match Schedule with an asterisk; Win Points, Autonomous Points, and Strength of 
Schedule Points for that Qualification Match  will not impact a Team’s ranking, and will not affect partici -
pation percentage for leagues.
i. Teams are reminded that <G1> is always in effect and Teams are expected to behave as if the addi -
tional Qualification Match  counted.
ii. In leagues, Teams may have a different number of Qualification Matches . Rankings are determined 
by the Win Percentage, which is the number of wins divided by the number of Qualification Matches  
that Teams have played.
<T13> Qualification Match tiebreakers.  Team rankings are determined throughout Qualification 
Matches as follows:
1. Average Win Points (Win Points / number of Matches played)
2. Average Autonomous Points (Autonomous Points / number of Matches played)
3. Average Strength of Schedule Points  (Strength of Schedule Points  / number of Matches played)
4. Highest Match score
5. Second-highest Match score
6. Random electronic draw
<T14> Small Tournaments have fewer Alliances.  The number of Alliances for a given event is determined 
as follows, except in extraordinary circumstances with the permission of the location’s RECF Regional 
Support Manager :
# of Teams # of Elimination Alliances
32+ 16
24-31 12
16-23 8
<16 # of Teams divided by 2, less any remainder
This rule is applied differently for VEX U. See rule <VUT7>.
<T15> Send a Student representative to Alliance Selection.  Each Team must send one Student rep-
resentative to the playing Field (or other designated area) to participate in Alliance Selection. If the Team 
representative fails to report in for Alliance Selection, their Team will be ineligible for participation in the 
Alliance Selection process.
Once the Alliance Selection begins, Student representatives cannot use electronic devices unless they 
have been demonstrated to be in airplane mode. No electronic communication by or with Student repre-
sentatives is allowed during the Alliance Selection process.

--- PAGE 77 ---

68
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Teams are advised to complete their scouting prior to the beginning of Alliance Selection, and to come to 
Alliance Selection prepared with a written list of potential Alliance Partners. Non-electronic methods of com -
munication are allowed. Rule <G2> and the Student-Centered Policy still apply during Alliance Selection. Any 
communication about Alliance Selection and specific Teams should be limited to Student Team Members.
<T16> Each Team may only be invited once to join one Alliance.  If a Team representative declines an 
Alliance Captain’s invitation during Alliance Selection, that Team is no longer eligible to be selected by 
another Alliance Captain . However, they are still eligible to play Elimination Matches  as an Alliance Captain . 
This video includes a full explanation of the Alliance Selection process.
For example:
 ● Alliance Captain  1 invites Team 000A to join their Alliance.
 ● Team 000A declines the invitation.
 ● No other Alliance Captains  may invite Team 000A to join their Alliance.
 ● However, Team 000A may still form their own Alliance if Team 000A is ranked high enough after Qualifica-
tion Matches to become an Alliance Captain .
Note: Alliances must have two Teams, and there are no “do-overs” during Alliance Selection . If enough 
Teams decline their invitations such that the full number of Alliances cannot be filled, the event will 
proceed with a reduced number of Alliances.
<T17> Elimination Matches follow the Elimination Bracket.  A sixteen (16) Alliance bracket plays as shown in 
Figure T17-1, with Matches proceeding in numbered order through each round.  
If an event is run with fewer than 16 Alliances, then they will use the bracket shown in Figure T17-1, with Byes 
awarded when there is no applicable Alliance. For example, in a Tournament with 12 Alliances, Alliances 1, 2, 3, 
& 4 would automatically advance to the Quarterfinals.
Figure T17-1: A 16-Alliance  bracket

--- PAGE 78 ---

69
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Thus, an eight (8) Alliance bracket would run as shown below:
At events with multiple divisions, each division champion Alliance will advance to the overall event finals. 
Alliance color assignment for these Matches will be determined by the original Alliance seeding within 
their respective divisions. The higher seeded Alliance (e.g., 1 is higher than 2) will be designated as the red 
Alliance, and the lower-seeded Alliance will be designated as the blue Alliance. 
 
If both Alliances hold the same seed number within their divisions, the Event Partner will conduct a coin 
flip to determine which Alliance is assigned to the red Alliance, with the remaining Alliance assigned to 
blue.
 
 
<T18> Elimination Matches are a blend of “Best of 1” and “Best of 3.”  “Best of 1” means that the winning 
Alliance in each Match advances to the next round of the Elimination Bracket . “Best of 3” means that the 
first Alliance to reach two wins will advance.
See the flowchart below for more information.
Figure T17-2: An 8-Alliance  bracket


--- PAGE 79 ---

70
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Figure T18-1: The process for determining how Elimination Matches  should be played.  

--- PAGE 80 ---

71
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<T19> Ties in Elimination Matches lead to limited rematches.  In the case of tied Matches during Elimina-
tion Matches, Tournament Manager will apply the following logic to determine which Alliance will progress 
to the next round.
a. In a “Best of 1” Elimination Round, the higher-seeded Alliance will advance and be declared the winner 
under the following guidelines.
i. After two (2) ties in a non-finals Match.
ii. After three (3) ties in a finals Match.
b. For single-division events or within a division: in a ”Best of 3” Elimination Round, the higher-seeded 
Alliance will advance and be declared the winner under the following guidelines.
i. After three (3) ties in a round in which neither Alliance has yet won a Match (0-0).
ii. After two (2) ties in a round in which each Alliance has won a single Match (1-1).
c. For single-division events or within a division: after two (2) ties in a “Best of 3” Elimination Round in 
which one Alliance has won a single Match (1-0), the Alliance with one (1) win will be declared the winner.
d. For a “Best of 3” overall Finals round at a multi-division event, Teams should continue to play tiebreaker 
Matches until one Alliance has won two (2) Matches.
<T20> Skills Match Schedule.  Teams play Robot Skills Matches on a first-come, first-served basis. Each 
Team will get the opportunity to play exactly three (3) Driving Skills Matches  and three (3) Autonomous 
Coding Skills Matches  at each Tournament and/or League Session.
Teams should review the event agenda and their Match Schedule to determine when the best possible 
time is to complete their Robot Skills Matches. If the Robot Skills Challenge area closes before a Team has 
completed all six (6) Robot Skills Matches, but it is determined that there was adequate time given, then the 
Team will automatically forfeit those unused Matches.
Details regarding logistics of Skills-Only Events can be found in the RECF Qualifying Criteria document .
a. Robot Skills Matches are only available to Teams who participate in Qualification Matches , unless the 
event is an approved Skills-Only Event or in cases where a VURC or VAIRC Team records skills scores 
in accordance with this RECF Library article . Teams who participate in Qualification Matches  during a 
specific League Ranking Session are the only Teams who can participate in Robot Skills Matches at that 
session.
b. Skills scores recorded by ineligible Teams will be deleted from Tournament Manager before the event is 
finalized on RobotEvents.com.
<T21> There is no requirement that Skills Challenge Fields have the same consistent modifications as 
the Head-to-Head Fields.  For example, there is no requirement that all Skills Challenge Fields are elevated 
to the same height as Head-to-Head Fields. However, all Skills Challenge Fields at a single event must use 
the same type of Field control and Field Perimeter, as described in rules <T8> and <T9>.

--- PAGE 81 ---

72
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
It is strongly recommended/preferred that all Skills Challenge Fields are consistent with each other, but this 
may not be the case in extreme circumstances. In order to use non-conforming Head-to-Head Fields for 
Skills Challenge runs (e.g. during lunch), the following steps should be taken:
 ● Teams must be informed that the Head-to-Head Fields may have some differences from the Skills 
Challenge Fields (e.g., they might not have GPS strips).
 ● Teams must be given an opportunity to select which type of Field they want to use, i.e. they cannot be 
required to use a Head-to-Head Field for any Skills Challenge run.
 
<T22> Skills Rankings at events.  Teams will be ranked at an event based on the following scores and 
tiebreakers:
1. Sum of highest Autonomous Coding Skills Match  score and highest Driving Skills Match  score.
2. Highest Autonomous Coding Skills Match  score.
3. Second-highest Autonomous Coding Skills Match  score.
4. Second-highest Driving Skills Match  score.
5. Highest sum of Skills Stop Times (see rule <RSC5>) from a Team’s highest Autonomous Coding Skills 
Match and highest Driving Skills Match  (i.e., the Matches in point 1).
6. Highest Skills Stop Time from a Team’s highest Autonomous Coding Skills Match  (i.e., the Match in point 
2).
7. Third-highest Autonomous Coding Skills Match  score.
8. Third-highest Driving Skills Match  score.
9. If a tie cannot be broken after all above criteria, then the following ordered criteria will be used to deter -
mine which Team had the “best” Autonomous Coding Skills Match :
i. Points earned for Placed Scoring Objects
ii. Number of Toggles set to a color other than yellow
iii. Points earned for ending the Match in the Midfield
10. If the tie still isn’t broken, the same process in Step 9 will be applied to each Team’s best Driving Skills 
Match.
11. If the tie still isn’t broken, events may choose to allow Teams to have one more deciding Driving Skills 
Match, to be ranked according to the standard criteria above, or declare both Teams the Robot Skills 
Challenge Winner.
<T23> Skills Rankings Globally.  Teams will be ranked globally based on their Robot Skills scores from 
Tournaments and Leagues that upload results to RobotEvents.com, according to the following tiebreakers:
1. Highest Robot Skills score (combined Autonomous Coding Skills Match  and Driving Skills Match  Score 
from a single event).
2. Highest Autonomous Coding Skills Match  score (from any event).

--- PAGE 82 ---

VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
73
3. Highest sum of Skills Stop Times (see rule <RSC5> ) from the Robot Skills Matches used for point 1.
4. Highest Skills Stop Time from the Autonomous Coding Skills Match  used for point 2.
5. Highest Driving Skills Match  score (from any event).
6. Highest Skills Stop Time from the Driving Skills Match  score used for point 5.
7.  Earliest posting of the highest Autonomous Coding Skills Match  score. The first Team to post a score 
ranks ahead of other Teams that post the same score at a later time, all else being equal.
8. Earliest posting of the highest Driving Skills Match  score. The first Team to post a score ranks ahead of 
other Teams that post the same score at a later time, all else being equal.
 
<T24> Robot Skills at League Events.  At league events in which Teams may submit Robot Skills Challenge 
scores across multiple sessions, the Robot Skills scores (combined highest Autonomous Coding Skills 
Match and Driving Skills Match  scores) used for rankings will be calculated from Matches within the same 
session.
For example, consider the following scores for a hypothetical Team across two league event sessions:
Autonomous Coding 
Skills Match Driving Skills Match Robot Skills Score
Session 1 50 60 110
Session 2 40 100 140
This Team would have a Robot Skills score of 140 for this event, and their scores from Session 2 would be 
used for the Event and Global tiebreakers listed in <T22>  and <T23> .

--- PAGE 83 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Section 6
VEX U

--- PAGE 84 ---

75
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Introduction
Section 6 - VEX U
While many colleges and universities already use the VEX V5 system in their academic classes, many more 
have extensive manufacturing capabilities beyond the standard “VEX metal” library. Fabrication techniques 
like machining and 3D printing are more common than ever in collegiate engineering programs, and we can’t 
wait to see what VEX U Robotics Competition Teams from around the world are able to create under these 
more advanced rules. 
As in past years, the season will include a culminating VEX U event at the VEX Robotics World Championship, 
along with regional Tournaments across the world. Participating schools will get the chance to prove their 
abilities in front of thousands of future engineers and show off what truly makes their school remarkable. The 
VEX U Robotics Competition is the perfect project-based supplement to many university level engineering 
programs, and gives Students the unique opportunity to demonstrate their real-world skills to potential 
employers, such as our event sponsors.
Game, Robot, and Tournament Rules
The VEX U Robotics Competition uses the VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override Field with some minor 
modifications. Anyone that has a V5RC Override Field can use it for a VEX U event or Team. Please consult 
earlier sections of this game manual for the basic set of competition rules and details. All of the standard 
rules apply, except for the modifications listed in this section. In the event of a conflict between rules, the 
rules listed in this Section of the game manual and any rulings on the official VEX U Q&A take precedence.
VURC Definitions
Additional Electronics  - Any Sensor, processor, or other electronic component used in Robot construction, 
and connected to the V5 Robot Brain, that is not sold by VEX Robotics. Examples include commercially-
available devices (e.g., Raspberry Pi) or custom devices designed and fabricated by the Team. See <VUR12> 
and <VUR13> for more details.
 
Alliance - A grouping of two (2) Robots from the same Team that have been chosen by the Students to play 
together during a given Match.
 
Electromechanical Assembly  - A complex system composed of multiple off-the-shelf components, which 
may include Sensors, mechanical parts, and actuators.
External Processor  - A computing device or microcontroller that independently processes Sensor data 
before sending it to the VEX V5 Brain.  
 
 
Fabricated Part - Any component used in Robot construction that is fabricated by Team members. See 
<VUR3> through <VUR7> for more details.

--- PAGE 85 ---

76
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Rule Modifications: Field Setup
Rule Modifications: Game
Raw Stock - Stock materials purchased from third-party vendors that may be used to create Fabricated 
Parts. See <VUR4> and <VUR5>.
 
Sensor - A device that detects and responds to changes in the environment, providing data to the Robot’s 
control system.
 
VEX U Student  - A Team member that meets all criteria listed in rule <VUT6>.
The VURC playing Field is set up differently than a Head-to-Head VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override 
Match, with the following modifications:
 ● The VEX GPS code strip must be installed on the Field.
 ● Modified Field layout. Only the Midfield Goal should begin the Match with a yellow/yellow Pin Placed 
in it.
 ● Modified Match Loads. Each Alliance gains an additional two yellow/yellow Pins that begin off the 
Field as Match Loads.
 ० Red Alliance Match Loads: 10 Cups, 10 red/yellow Pins, and 3 yellow/yellow Pins
 ० Blue Alliance Match Loads: 10 Cups, 10 blue/yellow Pins, and 3 yellow/yellow Pins
<VUG1> Different Robot starting sizes.  See <VUR1>.
<VUG2> Different Robot placement than rule <GG10>.  The red Team has the right to place one Robot on 
the Field first, followed by both blue Robots, and ending with the 2nd red Robot. This applies in Qualification 
Matches and Elimination Matches . If this right is used, once a Team has placed a Robot on the Field, its 
position cannot be readjusted prior to the Match.
 
<VUG3> Some electronic devices may be in motion or moving at the beginning of the Match. 
This includes active cooling fans, spinning LIDAR modules, and/or other similar sensors or Additional 
Electronics. These electronic devices should not initiate any form of motion for the entire Robot or any of its 
subsystems, and may not directly interact with Scoring Objects and/or other Robots.
 
 
<VUG4> Different availability of Loaders.  Drive Team Members may add Match Load Pins to the Loaders 
adjacent to their Alliance Station during the Autonomous Period and Driver Controlled Period of the Match.

--- PAGE 86 ---

77
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Rule Modifications: Robot Skills Challenge
<VUG5> Different scoring during the Autonomous Period.  The following are included in the calculation of 
an Alliance’s score for the purposes of determining the Autonomous Bonus:
a. A yellow Pin that is Placed in the Midfield is Owned by the Alliance that ends the Autonomous Period with 
a greater number of Robots in the Midfield. 
b. Points for ending the Autonomous Period in the Midfield.
<VUG6> Different Autonomous Win Point criteria.  An Autonomous Win Point is awarded to any Alliance 
that ends the Autonomous Period with all of the following tasks completed, and that has committed no 
Violations during the Autonomous Period:
1. At least twelve (12) Pins Placed for your Alliance (does not include Pins Placed in Quadrants on the 
opposing side of the Autonomous Line).
2. At least four (4) Goals each contain at least two (2) Pins scored for your Alliance (does not include Goals in 
Quadrants on the opposing side of the Autonomous Line).
3. Neither Robot is contacting the Field Perimeter.
4. At least one (1) Robot is within the Midfield.
 
<VUG7> Different expansion in the Midfield during the Endgame period.  Vertical expansion is limited to 
24” for any Robot that is partially or entirely within the infinite 3D vertical projection of the Midfield during the 
Endgame period.
All rules apply from V5RC Section 3: Robot Skills Challenge, with no modifications other than those noted 
below. 
<VURS1> VEX U Robot Skills Matches are set up differently than VEX V5 Robotics Competition Robot Skills 
Matches, with the following modification:
a. Modified Match Loads. Four (4) red/yellow Pins, six (6) blue/yellow Pins, and ten (10) Cups begin off the 
Field as Match Loads. See figure VURS1.
 
<VURS2> Teams are permitted to use both Robots in their VEX U Robot Skills Matches, per <VUT1> and 
<VUR1>.
 
<VURS3> Both Robots must start the Robot Skills Match in legal starting positions for the red Alliance. All 
other portions of rule <SG1> apply. Each Robot must use one red/yellow Pin as a Preload in accordance with 
<SG5>.

--- PAGE 87 ---

78
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Figure VURS1: The Field setup for a VEX U Robot Skills Match .

--- PAGE 88 ---

79
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Rule Modifications: Tournament
<VUT1> Instead of a 2-Team Alliance format, VURC Head-to-Head Matches will be played 1-Team vs. 
1-Team. Each Team will use two (2) Robots in each Match.
a. Teams are allowed to build and bring as many Robots as they would like, but only two (2)—one of each 
size as described in <VUR1>—may be brought from the pit to the playing Field for any Match.
b. All Robots must pass inspection before they are allowed to compete.
 
<VUT2> Qualification Matches will be conducted in the same manner as in a V5RC tournament , but in 
the revised 1v1 format described in <VUT1>. 
 
<VUT3> Elimination Matches will be conducted in the same manner as in a V5RC tournament, but 
without an Alliance Selection.  At the end of the competition, one Team will emerge as the Tournament 
champion. 
 
 
<VUT4> The Autonomous Period at the beginning of each Head-to-Head Match will be 30 seconds.
a. Human interaction with Robots during the Autonomous Period is strictly prohibited. 
b. If both Teams complete their routines before 30 seconds have elapsed, they have the option to signal 
that they wish to end the Autonomous Period early. Both Teams and the Head Referee must all agree on 
the “early stop.” This is not a requirement, and the option must have been established for all Teams at 
the event, such as during the event meeting.  
 
<VUT5> The Driver Controlled Period is shortened to 90 seconds and immediately follows the 
Autonomous Period.
 
<VUT6> VEX U Student eligibility.
a. All VEX U Team members MUST be matriculated in a post-secondary school OR have earned a post-
secondary education diploma, certificate, or other equivalent during the six (6) months preceding 
the VEX Robotics World Championship. The intent of this rule is to permit VEX U Students graduating 
mid-year to still be able to finish their competition season.
b. Professionals not enrolled in post-secondary education are not eligible to participate on a VEX U Team.
c. Students who are dual-enrolled in both a secondary school and in post-secondary courses are not 
eligible to participate on a VEX U Team.
d. VEX U Students may only be on exactly one (1) VEX U Team for the season. See <G5>.
e. If at least one member of a VEX U Robotics Team is aged 18 or older, rule <S2> does not apply.

--- PAGE 89 ---

80
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<VUT7> VURC tournaments have fewer Teams in Eliminations.  The number of Teams in Elimination 
Matches for a given event is determined as follows, except in extraordinary circumstances with the 
permission of the RECF Regional Support Manager. A number of Teams below 16 will result in one or more 
Byes for highest-ranking Teams. 
# of Teams # of elimination Teams
16+ 16
<16 # of Teams
Rule Modifications: Robot
<VUR1> Teams may use two (2) Robots in each Match. 
a. Both Robots may only be built from the following materials:
i. Official VEX Robotics products (see <VUR2>) 
ii. Fabricated Parts made by the Team (see <VUR3> through <VUR7>)
iii. Commercially-available springs, fasteners, and bearings (see <VUR8>, <VUR9>, and <VUR15>)
iv. A legal electronics system (see <VUR10> and <V UR11>)
v. Any legal Additional Electronics  (see <VUR12>)
vi. A legal pneumatics system (see <VUR14>)
vii. Unmodified legal Raw Stock (see <VUR4> and <VUR5>)
b. One Robot must be no larger than 24” (609.6 mm) x 24” (609.6 mm) x 24” (609.6 mm) at the start of the 
Match.
c. One Robot must be no larger than 15” (381 mm) x 15” (381 mm) x 15” (381 mm) at the start of the Match. 
 
<VUR2> Teams may use any official VEX Robotics products , other than the exceptions listed in the tables 
below, to construct their Robot. This includes those from the VEXpro, VEX EXP, VEX IQ, VEX GO, VEX 123, 
VEX CTE, and VEX Robotics by HEXBUG* product lines. Rule <R28> applies, but most modifications to non-
electrical components are allowed.
SKU Description
217-8080 Talon SRX
217-9191 Victor SPX
217-9090 Victor SP
217-4243 Pneumatic Control Module
217-4244 Power Distribution Panel
217-4245 Voltage Regulator Module
SKU Description
217-4347 775pro
217-2000 CIM Motor
217-3371 Mini CIM Motor
217-3351 BAG Motor
217-6515 Falcon 500

--- PAGE 90 ---

81
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
 This rule takes precedence over all other rules regarding Raw Stock and/or Fabricated Parts, such as <VUR5>.
* The HEXBUG brand is a registered trademark belonging to Spin Master Corp  
As of November 2025, all VEXpro parts are discontinued. To maintain a level playing field 
and ensure all VURC Teams have access to the same library of parts, functionally equivalent, 
drop-in part substitutes for VEXpro parts may be considered to meet the intent of <VUR2>. 
In order to meet our intent, each functionally equivalent, drop-in part must:
a. Match the form, fit, and function of the VEXpro part it is replacing.
b. Not provide a discernible or perceivable advantage over the comparable VEXpro part.
c. Comply with all other applicable VURC Robot rules.
Teams should be prepared to demonstrate or defend their part substitutes in inspection as 
necessary, when possible. 
The Game Design Committee  understands that this may be difficult in the immediate future, 
as the VEXpro website no longer hosts documentation on VEXpro parts, including but not 
limited to part descriptions, drawings, pictures, etc. The Game Design Committee  is working 
with VEX Robotics to explore and identify a better long-term solution to this problem. In the 
interim, we ask all Teams, referees, inspectors, and the entire VURC community to:
1. Work collaboratively, understanding that the intent of this clarification is to allow Robots to 
compete with minimal to no modification, not to prevent participation. 
2. Apply <G1>, <G3>, and the RECF Code of Conduct when interpreting this guidance. We 
recognize this may temporarily result in a challenging inspection environment; good faith 
is essential.
3. Refrain from exploiting this allowance. We intentionally and meaningfully chose to attempt 
to maintain product legality and competitive fairness while products are discontinued. De -
liberately pushing boundaries may force the Game Design Committee  to entirely reassess 
the legality of all VEXpro components.
<VUR3> Fabricated Parts may be made by applying the following manufacturing processes to legal Raw 
Stock:
a. Additive manufacturing processes, such as 3D printing.
b. Subtractive manufacturing processes, such as cutting, drilling, routing, or machining.
c. Bending, such as sheet metal braking or thermoforming.
d. Attaching materials to one another, such as welding or chemically bonding (e.g., epoxy).
e. Molding of non-metals, such as injecting polyurethane into a 3D printed mold.

--- PAGE 91 ---

82
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<VUR4> Fabricated Parts must be made from legal Raw Stock. To be considered Raw Stock, the material 
must be obtained in one of the following forms before undergoing the fabrication processes listed in 
<VUR3>:
Type Shape / Profile Examples
1 Sheet Flat Plane
• Sheet metal 
• ⅛” polycarbonate sheet
• Plywood
2 Solid Billet “Thick” rectangular 
beam / block
• 4” x 4” x 6” solid aluminum billet
• 2” x 2” x 2” acetal block
3 Solid Bar “Thin” rectangular beam • 2x4 wood planks
• ¼” x 3” aluminum bars
4 Hollow Bar Hollow rectangular beam • 1” x 1”, 1/32” wall aluminum box tube
5 Solid Rod
Cylinder,
Hexagonal or Rounded 
Hexagonal Stock
• ¼” steel rod
• ¼” acetal rod
• VEXpro Hex Shaft
6 Hollow Rod / Tube
Hollow Cylinder,
Drilled/Threaded 
Hexagonal or Rounded 
Hexagonal Stock
• Copper tubing
• PVC pipe
• VEXpro ThunderHex Stock
7 Angle 90° “L ” shape • 1” x 1”, 1/16” thickness aluminum angle
8 U- / C-Channel “U” or “C”. • 1/4” High x 1” Wide Aluminum U-Channel
9 Non-Metal 3D 
Printer Filament Thin cylinder
• PLA or TPU filament 
• Composite nylon filament (e.g. 
Markforged OnyxTM)
10 Synthetic Polymer 
used for Molding Liquid • Polyurethane
• Silicone
11 Solid Sphere Solid (not hollow) 
uniformly rounded stock
• Steel ball bearing
• Shaped wood finial
Teams are not required to exhaustively define the specific material type for each com -
ponent of every Fabricated Part in their Engineering Notebook, as it should be obvious 
from the engineering drawings required by <VUR7>. However, unusual parts should be 
expected to receive increased scrutiny.
If any materials do not easily fall into one of these categories, then that is probably an 
indication that it is not intended to be a legal type of Raw Stock. If a Team cannot demon-
strate that the component was made from a legal type of Raw Stock, then they will be 
asked to remove it from their Robot.

--- PAGE 92 ---

83
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<VUR5> The following material types are not considered Raw Stock , and are therefore not permitted:
Type Examples
1
Any otherwise-legal Raw Stock that 
has been post-processed by drilling, 
machining, or otherwise removing material
• Angle aluminum with regularly-
spaced holes or slots 
• Perforated sheet metal
2 Extrusions that do not fall under one 
of the categories listed in <VUR4>
• Non-rectangular aluminum extrusions, 
such as 80/20, T-slot, or Octanorm
• Gear stock
3
Assembled items (or pre-arranged 
kits of unassembled items) that form 
a single, more complex component
• Gearboxes
• Claw mechanisms 
• Swerve drive modules
4
Commercial Off-the-Shelf items 
that are intended to be used 
with minimal modification
• Wheels
• Gears
• Timing belts and pulleys
5 Materials that are intended 
to be cast or sintered
• Resin / powdered-bed 3D printing
• Molten aluminum used for sand casting
Note: <VUR2> takes precedence over this rule. Materials purchased from VEX Robotics that fall 
under one of these categories (e.g., VersaFrame pre-drilled extrusion) are permitted.
In industry, terms like “raw stock,” “raw material,” and “material stock” are often used inter -
changeably and cover an extremely broad scope of physical goods. The lists in <VUR4> 
and <VUR5> are intended to explain what specific material types and profiles fall under the 
defined term “Raw Stock” in the context of the VEX U competition.
 
 
<VUR6> Fabricated Parts cannot be made from Raw Stock which poses a safety or damage risk  to the 
event, other Teams, or Field Elements. Examples of prohibited materials include, but are not limited to:
a. Any material intended to produce flames or pyrotechnic effects.
b. Any material that is liquid at the time of the Match. Examples include hydraulic fluids, oils, greases, liquid 
mercury, and tire sealant.
i. This does not include fabrication processes that involve the use of liquids, such as milling coolant or 
epoxy.
c. Any matter that shatters or otherwise presents an excessive Field/safety hazard upon failure. Examples 
include fiberglass, acrylic, and carbon fiber sheet/tube stock.
i. This rule refers specifically to material legality itself. Any potentially unsafe mechanisms made from 
legal Raw Stock may still be addressed by <S1> and <R19>.
ii. 3D printer filaments that include carbon fiber (or similar) additives or carbon fiber (or similar) inlay are 
exempt from this exception, and are considered legal for use in Fabricated Parts.

--- PAGE 93 ---

84
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<VUR7> Fabricated Parts must be made by Team members. Any Fabricated Parts must be accompanied 
by documentation that demonstrates the Team’s design and construction process for that Fabricated Part. 
a. The minimum acceptable form of documentation is an engineering drawing with multiple views for the 
part in question. These drawings may be included in a Team’s Engineering Notebook or in a standalone 
appendix to the Engineering Notebook.
b. Any Fabricated Part must have been entirely designed and produced by Team members. For example, 
parts ordered by the Team and 3D printed by a third party would be prohibited.
c. Teams will be required to provide this documentation as requested by inspectors, Head Referees, or 
judges at any time at an event. Failure to provide acceptable documentation will result in the part being   
deemed illegal for use; therefore, <R2>, <G6>, and/or <G1> will apply.
<VUR8> Teams may use commercially-available springs  on their Robots. For the purposes of this rule, a 
“spring” is any device used for storing and releasing elastic potential energy. Examples include, but are not 
limited to:
a. Compression, tension, torsion, constant force, or conical springs made from spring steel.
b. Springs made from elastic thread or rubber, such as surgical tubing, bungee cords, or stretchable 
braided rope.
c. Closed-loop (pneumatic) gas shocks.  
Note: Gas shocks are not considered pneumatic devices in the context of <VUR14>. Gas shocks may 
not be modified in any way. 
 
<VUR9> Teams may use commercially available fastener hardware  on their Robot. Examples include (but 
are not limited to):
 ● Screws, nuts, rivets, and heatset inserts
 ● Hinges, pins, rod ends, threaded rods, and hose clamps
 ● Ancillary fastener accessories, such as washers or spacers
 ● Adhesives such as epoxy, glue, or tape (only when used to join together two parts)
If the primary function of the part is not “fastening”, then <VUR5>, <VUR6>, and/or <VUR7> take 
precedence over this rule. Illegal examples include (but are not limited to):
 ● A prefabricated non-VEX wheel, even though it may technically connect tread to a shaft
 ● 80/20 extrusion; other items get “fastened to it”, it is not the part doing the “fastening”
 ● Using grip tape to improve wheel traction

--- PAGE 94 ---

85
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<VUR10> Each Robot must utilize exactly one (1) V5 Robot Brain and at least one (1) V5 Robot Radio 
connected to a V5 Controller. 
a. Teams must abide by the power rules noted in <R12> and <VUR12d>.
b. Wireless communication between Robots is permitted if using legal V5 Robot Brains and V5 Robot 
Radios. No other types of wireless communication protocols (e.g., radio, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi) are permitted.  
<VUR11> There is no restriction on the number of V5 Smart Motors (11W) [276-4840] and/or Smart 
Motors (5.5W) [276-4842]  that Robots may use. No other motors, servos, or electronic actuators are 
permitted, including those sold by VEX (e.g., the 2-Wire 393 Motor). 
Note 1: Rule <R28> still applies in VEX U. Teams may not modify Smart Motors, and must use official/
unmodified gear cartridges.
Note 2: Commercially available pneumatic actuators and pneumatic solenoids are permitted within 
the guidelines of <VUR14>.
Note 3: Legal Additional Electronics  may include their own motor, servo, or actuator, per <VUR12>. 
 
<VUR12> There is no restriction on commercially available Sensors, External Processors, or Additional 
Electronics that Robots may use for sensing and processing, except as follows:
a. Sensors and External Processors  MUST be connected to the V5 Robot Brain via any of the externally 
accessible ports (i.e., without any modification to the commercially available electronics). A Sensor may 
be connected to an External Processor which then connects to the V5 Robot Brain.
b. Sensors, External Processors, and Additional Electronics  CANNOT directly electrically interface with 
VEX motors and/or solenoids.
c. Sensors and Additional Electronics  may only receive power from any of the following: 
i. Directly from the V5 Robot Brain via any externally accessible port.
ii. From an additional lithium ion, lithium iron, or nickel metal hydride battery pack (only one (1) 
additional battery can be used for Sensor/processing power). This additional battery pack must 
operate at a maximum of less than 13 volts.
iii. Directly from an External Processor
d. Only the V5 Battery can power the V5 Brain.
e. Sensors, External Processors, and/or Additional Electronics  which include a low-powered motor as an 
integral part of their primary sensing/processing function, such as an External Processor’s cooling fan 
or a spinning Sensor, are permissible.
i. Standalone motors which serve no additional sensing or processing functionality (e.g., using 
a commercially-available brushless motor in a drivetrain) are not considered legal Additional 
Electronics, and would be considered a Violation of <V UR11>.

--- PAGE 95 ---

86
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
f. Pneumatic solenoids are the only types of solenoids that are permitted as Additional Electronics . 
Solenoids used for any purpose other than opening and closing a pneumatic valve are considered an 
actuator and therefore prohibited, per <V UR11>.
g. <R28> still applies in VEX U, Teams may not alter or modify electronic parts from the VEX product lines. 
It is legal to rotate the blocks of the V5 Optical Sensor and V5 Distance Sensor relative to their bases, 
and to manufacture custom back plates for these sensors.
 
 
<VUR13> Commercially available Electromechanical Assemblies are not legal  for use on Robots.
a. For the purposes of this rule, any system that integrates Sensors with other mechanical parts that are 
fabricated by anyone other than Team members and which serve more use than the basic definition of a 
Sensor would be considered an Electromechanical Assembly, and is therefore not legal. 
b. Examples may include but are not limited to: odometry pods.
c. Commercially available Sensors with simple plastic housings that do not have any use beyond 
protecting internal components and aiding in mounting of the Sensor are not considered 
Electromechanical Assemblies . 
The intent of this rule is to remind Teams to focus their efforts on integrating custom parts 
with the VEX Robotics ecosystem. The VEX U Competition operates within a semi-closed 
system, not an open-build system. Teams should make efforts to use VEX Robotics parts 
where possible. Parts like additional Sensors (LIDAR, encoders, etc.) should generally be 
considered okay, but assemblies/systems from other robotics suppliers that remove the 
challenge of systems integration should not be considered a legal part.
<VUR14> Teams may utilize an unlimited amount of the following commercially available pneumatic 
components: cylinders, actuators, valves, gauges, storage tanks, regulators, manifolds, tubing, and 
solenoids. 
a. Pneumatic devices may only be charged to a maximum of 100 psi.
b. Compressors or any other forms of “on- Robot” charging are not permitted.
c. All commercial components must be rated for 100 psi or higher. Teams should be prepared to provide 
documentation that verifies these ratings to inspectors if requested.
d. Components must not be modified from their original state, other than the following exceptions:
i. Cutting pneumatic tubing or wiring to length; assembling components using pre-existing threads, 
brackets, or fittings; or minor cosmetic labels
e. If commercially available 12V solenoids are used, these are considered Additional Electronics  and must 
therefore satisfy all conditions listed in <VUR12>. 12V solenoids may be either powered by an additional 
power source (per <VUR12d>), or by a 5V-12V step-up converter from the V5 Robot Brain. If an external 
power source (or other Additional Electronics  device) is used to interface with the solenoid, Teams 
MUST be able to demonstrate that there is no way for the solenoid to receive power while the Robot is 
receiving a Disabled state from the field controller.

--- PAGE 96 ---

87
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<VUR15> Teams may use commercially available bearings on their Robot.  For the purpose of this rule, 
a ‘bearing’ is a part that supports external loads, reduces friction, and improves efficiency by facilitating 
smooth dynamic motion between components. Legal examples include (but are not limited to):
 ● Parts supporting rotational motion: radial bearings, roller bearings, thrust bearings, needle bearings, 
one-way bearings, bushings, etc.
 ● Parts supporting linear motion: linear bearings, linear slides, drawer slides, etc.
Team Composition
We want to see Universities face off in a global head-to-head competition. Schools are not limited to one 
Team, and a Team may consist of multiple colleges, but we hope that each Team identifies with and proudly 
represents one (1) post-secondary institution. (e.g., “Clarkson University” vs. “UC Santa Barbara”). Of course, 
college-level “club” Teams and mixed composition Teams are encouraged to join! However, as noted in 
<VUT7>, Students who have not yet graduated secondary school are not eligible to participate in VEX U, 
even if they are “dual-enrolled” or taking post-secondary courses. A Student cannot be a member of a V5RC 
and a VURC Team simultaneously, regardless of eligibility.

--- PAGE 97 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Appendix A
Field Overview and Specifications

--- PAGE 98 ---

A2
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Game Field Introduction
Appendix A - Field Overview
Field Overview
This document will provide Bill of Materials (BOM) information and detailed specifications for the Official 
Competition Field.
Please note: this Field can utilize both the VEX Portable Competition Field Perimeter (276-8242 and the VEX 
Competition Field Perimeter (278-1501) developed by VEX Robotics. Instructions and specifications for 
these Field Perimeters are available in separate documents and are important for the Field assembly.
This document is divided up into three sections:
1. Field Overview
2. Field BOM
3. Field Specifications
There is also an accompanying STEP file which can be imported into most 3D modeling programs (e.g., 
Inventor, Sketchup, Solidworks, etc.). This 3D model shows the “official” setup of a VEX V5 Robotics 
Competition Override competition Field, as well as detailed models of individual Field Elements. For 
additional game-play detail, please refer to the VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override Game Manual.
V5RC Override is played on a 12ft x 12ft foam mat, surrounded by a Field Perimeter, with nine (9) Goals, four 
(4) Loaders, and four (4) Toggles on the Field.
The V5RC Override Field consists of fifty-six (56) Cups and sixty-three (63) Pins.
For more details and specific gameplay rules, please refer to the V5RC Override Game Manual.


--- PAGE 99 ---

A3
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Game Objects & Field Bill of Materials
All of these items are available for purchase from www.vexrobotics.com
Generic Field Elements - Reusable Each Year
Part Number Description
278 -1501 Field Perimeter Frame & Hardware
276-8242 Portable Competition Field Perimeter
276-6905 Anti-Static Field Tiles (18-Pack)
276-7741 Smart Field Controller Kit
Official VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override Specific Elements
Part Number Description Quantity per Full Field
276-9250 V5RC 2026-27 Full Field & Game Element Kit
276-9251 V5RC 2026-27 Game Element Kit 1
276-9252 V5RC 2026-27 Field Element Kit 1 1
276-9091 V5RC Field Element Plates (4-Pack)* 2
*Optional. Only needed if Field Element Plates are not already owned.
Practice Elements
Part Number Description
276-9255 V5RC 2026-27 Scoring Element Kit

--- PAGE 100 ---

A4
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Field Specifications Introduction
This section will outline the specifications that are most important to Teams designing a Robot to compete 
in VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override. Though many of the critical dimensions are included in this 
section, it may be necessary to consult the separate assembly guide and 3D CAD models of the Field for 
an additional level of detail. If you can’t find a dimension in the specifications, we include a full model of the 
Field to “virtually” measure whatever dimension is necessary.
Field components may vary slightly from event to event. This is to be expected; Teams will need to adapt 
accordingly. It is good design practice to create mechanisms capable of accommodating variances in the 
Field and Scoring Objects.
Note: Minor Field repairs are permissible, provided that the repairs do not affect gameplay. Examples 
of minor Field repairs include (but are not limited to) threadlocker applied to Field Element mounting 
hardware. Be sure to check the Official Q&A for specific examples or to get an official clarification.


--- PAGE 101 ---

A5
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026


--- PAGE 102 ---

A6
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026


--- PAGE 103 ---

A7
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026


--- PAGE 104 ---

A8
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026


--- PAGE 105 ---

A9
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026


--- PAGE 106 ---

A10
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026


--- PAGE 107 ---

A11
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026


--- PAGE 108 ---

A12
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026


--- PAGE 109 ---

A13
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026


--- PAGE 110 ---

A14
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026


--- PAGE 111 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Appendix B
Glossary of Terms

--- PAGE 112 ---

B2
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Adult  - Anyone who is not a Student or another defined term (e.g., Head Referee).
Alliance  - A pre-assigned grouping of two Robots that are paired together during a given Head-to-Head 
Match.
Alliance Captain  - One of the Teams with the privilege of inviting another available Team to form an Alliance 
for Elimination Matches . See <T16>.
 
Alliance Selection  - The process of choosing the permanent Alliances for Elimination Matches . The 
Alliance Selection proceeds as follows:
1. The highest-ranked Team at the end of Qualification Matches  becomes the first Alliance Captain .
2. The Alliance Captain  invites another Team to join their Alliance.
3. The invited Team representative either accepts or declines as outlined in <T16>.
4. The next-highest-ranked Team becomes the next Alliance Captain .
5. Alliance Captains  continue to select their Alliances in this order until all Alliances are formed for Elimina-
tion Matches.
 
Alliance Station  - The designated regions where the Drive Team Members must remain for the duration of 
the Match.
 
Autonomous Bonus - A point bonus awarded to the Alliance that has earned the most points at the end of 
the Autonomous Period. See <SC7> for more information.
 
Autonomous Coding Skills Match  - see Match.
 
Autonomous Line  - The pair of white tape lines that run diagonally across the Field and around the Midfield, 
and the space between those lines. See <SG7> for more information.
 
Autonomous Period  - A time period during which Robots operate and react only to sensor inputs and 
pre-programmed commands.
 
Autonomous Points (AP)  - The second basis of ranking Teams. An Alliance who wins the Autonomous 
Bonus during a Qualification Match  earns ten (10) Autonomous Points. In the event of a tie, both Alliances 
will receive five (5) Autonomous Points.
Appendix B - Glossary of Terms

--- PAGE 113 ---

B3
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Autonomous Win Point (AWP) - An additional Win Point awarded to any Alliance that has completed a 
defined set of tasks at the end of the Autonomous Period of a Qualification Match . Both Alliances can earn 
an Autonomous Win Point if both Alliances accomplish these tasks. See <SC7>  for more information.
 
Builder - Any Student Team member who helps build the Robot. Adults are permitted to teach Builders 
associated concepts, but should never work on the Robot.
Bye - A situation in which an Alliance automatically advances to the next round of Tournament play without 
competing.
Coder - Any Student Team member who contributes to the computer code that is downloaded onto the 
Robot. Adults are permitted to teach Coders associated concepts, but should never work on the code that 
goes on the Robot.
 
Cup - A Scoring Object, measuring approximately 3.15” (80mm) in diameter and 6.5” (164.5mm) tall. Each 
Cup consists of two halves: one transparent and one opaque.
Figure C-1: A Cup
Defensive - A category of strategies, Robot actions, and/or Robot statuses that can be employed by a 
Team during a Match; see rules <GG14>  and <GG15>  for more information. A Robot is Defensive while it 
is engaged in actions that cannot increase its Alliance’s score for the current Match, and instead limits an 
opponent’s ability to score or play the game. A Robot can be in possession of a Scoring Object and capable 
of scoring, but still be Defensive based on its actions. Examples include, but are not limited to:
 ● De-scoring in a way that doesn’t increase points for the Robot’s own Alliance
 ● Limiting access to a portion of the Field while not attempting to score
 ● Holding, blocking, impeding, or otherwise restricting or controlling an opponent’s movements

--- PAGE 114 ---

B4
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Remember, Defensive Robot actions or Robot statuses are not automatically Violations. 
However, Robot actions or statuses that are performed or achieved in a Defensive manner 
are more likely to be Violations, and Teams should be more careful when employing Defen-
sive strategies.
Designer - Any Student Team member who helps design the Robot to be built for competition. Adults are 
permitted to teach Designers associated concepts, but should never work on the design of the Robot.
 
Disablement - A penalty applied to a Team for a safety Violation. A Team that receives a Disablement is not 
allowed to operate their Robot for the remainder of the Match, and the Drive Team Member(s) will be asked 
to place their controller(s) on the ground or another safe location outside of the Field, as directed by the 
Head Referee.
 
 
Disqualification  - A penalty applied to a Team for a Major Violation (see <GG6>  for more details). If a Team 
receives a Disqualification  in a Match, the Head Referee will notify the Team of their Violation at the end of 
the Match. A Team that receives a Disqualification  in a Qualification Match  receives zero Win Points, zero 
Autonomous Win Points, zero Autonomous Points, and zero Strength of Schedule Points . When a Team 
receives a Disqualification  in an Elimination Match, the entire Alliance is Disqualified and they receive a loss 
for the Match. At the Head Referee’s discretion, repeated Violations and/or Disqualifications  for a single 
Team may lead to its Disqualification  for the entire Tournament (see <GG6> ). A Team that receives a Dis-
qualification in a Driving Skills Match  or Autonomous Coding Skills Match  receives a score of zero for that 
Robot Skills Match.
 
Drive Team Member - A Student who stands in the Alliance Station during a Match. Adults are not allowed 
to be Drive Team Members. See rule <GG1> .
 
Driver Controlled Period  - A time period during which Drive Team Members operate their Robot using a 
VEX V5 controller.
 
Driving Skills Match  - see Match.
Elimination Bracket  - A schedule of Elimination Matches  for eight (8) to sixteen (16) Alliances. See <T17> .
 
Elimination Match - see Match.
 
Endgame - A time period consisting of the last 10 seconds of a Head-to-Head Match, in which Robots 
attempt to end the Match in the Midfield. See rule <SG12> .

--- PAGE 115 ---

B5
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Entanglement  - A Robot status. A Robot is Entangled if it has grabbed, hooked, or attached to an opposing 
Robot or a Field Element. See rule <GG14>.
 
 
Event Partner - The volunteer VEX V5 Robotics Competition Tournament coordinator who serves as 
an overall manager for the volunteers, venue, event materials, and all other event considerations. Event 
Partners serve as the official liaison between the RECF, event volunteers, and event attendees.
 
Field - The entire playing Field, comprising the Floor and the Field Perimeter.
 
Field Element - The Field, white tape, Loaders, Goals, Toggles, and all supporting structures and accessories 
(such as field monitors, etc.).
Field Perimeter - The outer part of the Field, made up of 12 straight sections.
Floor - The interior flat part of the playing Field, made up of an array of six (6) gray foam field tiles wide by six 
(6) gray foam field tiles long (totaling 36 Field tiles) that are within the Field Perimeter.
Game Design Committee (GDC)  - The creators of Override, and authors of this Game Manual. The Game 
Design Committee  is the only official source for rules clarifications and Q&A responses; see Section 1.
 
Goal  - One of the nine (9) designated locations around the Field in which Robots attempt to score Pins and 
Cups. Goals are octagonal, and each Goal is one of three colors: red, blue, or black. The center Goal is 8.7” 
(222.7mm) tall, neutral Goals in Quadrants are 5.8” (146.5mm) tall, and Alliance-specific Goals are 3.25” 
(82.5mm) tall.
Figure G-1: The four types of Goals in a V5RC Override Match
Head Referee  - A certified impartial volunteer responsible for enforcing the rules in this manual as written. 
Head Referees are the only people who may discuss ruling interpretations or scoring questions with Teams 
at an event. Large events (e.g., Signature Events, World Championships, etc.) might include multiple Head 
Referees at the Event Partner’s discretion.

--- PAGE 116 ---

B6
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Head-to-Head Match  - see Match.
 
 
Holding  - A Robot status; see rule <GG17> for more information. Holding is legal until it exceeds the limits in 
<GG17>. A Robot is considered to be Holding if it meets any of the following criteria during a Match:
 ● Trapping - Limiting the movement of an opponent Robot to a small or confined area of the Field, approx-
imately the size of one foam field tile or less, without an avenue for escape. Note that if a Robot is not 
attempting to escape, it is not considered Trapped.
 ● Pinning - Preventing the movement of an opponent Robot through contact with the Field Perimeter, a 
Field Element, or another Robot.
 ● Lifting - Controlling an opponent’s movements by raising or tilting the opponent’s Robot off of the Floor. 
Preventing a Robot that is already off of the Floor from returning to the Floor may also be considered 
Lifting or Trapping.
Loader  - One of the four designated locations (two per Alliance) around the Field where Drive Team Members 
can introduce Match Load Pins and Cups. See rule <SG11>.
Figure L-1: A Loader
Match  - A set time period, consisting of an Autonomous Period and/or Driver Controlled Periods , during 
which Teams play a defined version of Override to earn points.
Match types:
 ● Autonomous Coding Skills Match  - A Robot Skills Match in which a single Robot operates during a one 
minute Autonomous Period. There is no Driver Controlled Period. Teams can elect to end an Autonomous 
Coding Skills Match  early if they wish to record a Skills Stop Time.
 ● Driving Skills Match  - A Robot Skills Match in which one Team operates their Robot during a one minute 
Driver Controlled Period. There is no Autonomous Period. Teams can elect to end a Driving Skills Match  
early as described in rule <RSC5> if they wish to record a Skills Stop Time.

--- PAGE 117 ---

B7
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
 ● Elimination Match - A Head-to-Head Match used in the process of determining the champion Alliance. 
Alliances of two (2) Teams face off according to the Elimination Bracket ; the winning Alliance moves on 
to the next round.
 ● Head-to-Head Match - A Match that consists of two Alliances that work to outscore the other Alliance in 
a two-minute Match. Qualification Matches , Finals Matches, and optional Practice Matches are Head-to-
Head Matches.
 ● Practice Match - A non-scored Head-to-Head Match used to provide time for Teams to get acquainted 
with the official playing Field and procedures. Head Referees should not record or track standard 
gameplay Violations that occur during Practice Matches. Egregious Violations may be recorded and 
tracked at the discretion of the Head Referee, and CoC-related Violations  should be handled through 
the CoC-related Violation process (see figure V-3).
 ● Qualification Match - A Head-to-Head Match that is used to determine Teams’ rankings for Alliance 
Selection. Each Qualification Match  consists of two Alliances competing to earn Win Points, Autono-
mous Points, and Strength of Schedule Points .
 ● Robot Skills Match - A Driving Skills Match  or Autonomous Coding Skills Match .
Match Type Participants Specific Rules Autonomous 
Period (m:ss)
Driver Controlled 
Period (m:ss)
Head-to-Head Match
Two Alliances 
(red/blue) each 
composed of 
two Teams, with 
one Robot each
Scoring (“SC”), 
General Game (“GG”) 
and Specific Game 
(“SG”) sections
0:15 1:45
Driving Skills Match One Team, with 
one Robot Section 4 None 1:00
Autonomous Coding 
Skills Match
One Team, with 
one Robot Section 4 1:00 None
VEX U Robotics
Competition
Head-to-Head
Match
Two Teams (red/
blue), with two
Robots each
Section 6 0:30 1:30
VEX U Robotics
Competition Driving
Skills Match
One Team, with 
two Robots Section 6 None 1:00
VEX U Robotics
Competition
Autonomous
Coding Skills Match
One Team, with 
two Robots Section 6 1:00 None
Match Load - One of the 20 Cups, 10 per Alliance, or 22 Pins, 11 per Alliance, that begin the Match in an 
Alliance Station and which may be introduced during the Match. See rule <SG11> .

--- PAGE 118 ---

B8
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Midfield - The center square-shaped area of the Field  in which Robots attempt to end the Match to score 
additional points. The Midfield is defined by the outer edge of the white tape line square, and can be entered 
by all Robots during the Autonomous Period . See Figure Q-1.
Notebooker - Any Student  Team  member who contributes to the Team’s  engineering notebook or asso -
ciated documentation. Adults are permitted to teach Notebookers  associated concepts, but should never 
work on the engineering notebook or other documentation.
Offensive - A category of strategies, Robot actions, and/or Robot statuses that can be employed by a 
Team  during a Match; see rules <GG14> and <GG15> for more information. A Robot is Offensive while it is 
engaged in actions that could directly increase its Alliance’s score for the current Match. Examples include, 
but are not limited to:
● Adding a Scoring Object  to a Goal to score points
● Moving toward a Goal with a Scoring Object  that could earn points for their Alliance
● Changing the status of a Toggle
● Achieving (or attempting to achieve) any Robot status that adds points to their Alliance’s score
● Obtaining (or attempting to obtain) Scoring Objects
Figure MS-1: An example of a Qualification Match Schedule
Match Schedule - A list of Matches that is generated at the start of an event. The Match Schedule  includes 
the predetermined, randomly-paired Alliances that will be competing in each Qualification Match , and 
the expected start times for these Matches. The Match Schedule  may be subject to change at the Event 
Partner’s  discretion.

--- PAGE 119 ---

B9
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Owned - A yellow Pin  status. A Placed  yellow Pin  is Owned  by an Alliance if the Toggle  in that Quadrant  is 
set to the Alliance’s color.
Placed - A Scoring Object  status. See <SC2>.
Pin - A Scoring Object  measuring approximately 1.6” (40mm) in diameter and 6.5” (165mm) tall . Each Pin  
consists of two halves, and each half is red, blue, or yellow.
Figure P-1: The four types of Pins in a V5RC Override Match
Practice Match - see Match.
Preload - The Pins , one (1) per Robot, placed by each Team  prior to the start of each Match. See <SG5>.
Quadrant - One of four designated triangular areas of the Field . Each Quadrant  contains two Goals and 
one Toggle . Robots may score Pins  in the Goals within a Quadrant  and may attempt to set that Quadrant’s  
Toggle  to control ownership of yellow Pins  scored in that Quadrant .
A Quadrant  is defined by the outer edges of the white tape lines, the Field Perimeter , and the colored tape 
that defines the Load Zones .
Each Quadrant  is described as red or blue based on the Alliance-colored Goal it includes. See Figure Q-1.

--- PAGE 120 ---

B10
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Qualification Match  - see Match. 
 
Regional Support Manager (RSM)  - An RECF staff member who is assigned to support Teams and events in 
a defined geographic area.
Robot - A machine that has passed inspection, designed by Student Team members to execute one or more 
tasks autonomously and/or by remote control from a Drive Team Member.
 
Robot Skills Match  - see Match.
 
Scoring Object - A Cup or Pin.
Scorekeeper Referee - An impartial volunteer responsible for tallying scores at the end of a Match. Score-
keeper Referees do not make ruling interpretations, and should redirect any Team questions regarding rules 
or scores to a Head Referee.
Skills Stop Time  - The time remaining in a Robot Skills Match when a Team ends the Match early. See 
<RSC5>  for more details.
 
Strategist - Any Student Team member who contributes to the Match strategies used to score points during 
a Qualification Match  or Robot Skills Match, including assessing the impact of other Teams’ performance 
and strategies on the Team’s strategy (e.g., scouting). Adults are permitted to teach Strategists associated 
concepts, but should never create or dictate a Team’s Match strategy.
Figure Q-1: An overhead view of the Override Field with the four Quadrants  (blue, purple, pink, orange) and Midfield  (yellow) highlighted.

--- PAGE 121 ---

B11
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Strength of Schedule Points (SP)  - The third basis of ranking Teams. Strength of Schedule Points  are 
equivalent to the score of the losing Alliance in a Qualification Match . In the event of a tie, both Alliances 
receive Strength of Schedule Points  equal to the tie score. If both Teams on an Alliance are Disqualified, the 
Teams on the not Disqualified Alliance will receive their own score as Strength of Schedule Points  for that 
Match.
Student - A person is considered a Student if they meet both of the following criteria:
a. Anyone who is earning or has earned credit toward a secondary school (i.e., high school) diploma, cer -
tificate, or other equivalent during the six (6) months preceding the VEX Robotics World Championship. 
Courses earning credits leading up to high school would satisfy this requirement.
b. Anyone born after May 1, 2007 (i.e., who will be 19 or younger at VEX Worlds 2027). Eligibility may also 
be granted based on a disability that has delayed education by at least one year.
i. Middle School Student - A Student born after May 1, 2011 (i.e., who will be 15 or younger at VEX 
Worlds 2027). Any Student who meets this criteria may also compete as High School Students.
ii. High School Student - Any eligible Student that is not a Middle School Student.
 
 
Team - One or more Students make up a Team. In the context of this game manual, Student Team members 
fill multiple roles related to Robot design, build, coding, strategy, and documentation. See <G2> , <G4> , <G5>  
for more information. Adults may not fulfill any of these roles. See Appendix D for more information about 
Team classifications and Student roles.
Time-out - A single break period no greater than three minutes (3:00) allotted for each Alliance during the 
Elimination Bracket . See <GG7> .
Toggle - One of four (4) triangular shaped Field Elements mounted to the Field Perimeter that can be Owned 
to control yellow Pins scored in the corresponding Quadrant. Each Toggle has 3 sides that, when viewed 
from inside the Field, indicate which Alliance Owns the Toggle. Toggles are 25.8” (656.2mm) long and each 
face of the triangle is approximately 2.05” (52.2mm) wide . See <SC4>  for more information.
Figure T-1: A Toggle.

--- PAGE 122 ---

VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
B12
Tournament  - A competition event that includes scored Matches, and which is run by an Event Partner. See 
this article in the RECF Library  for more information on event formats and classifications.
 
 
Violation  - The act of breaking a rule in the game manual. See Appendix C for additional information on 
Violations and penalties.
 ● Minor Violation - A Violation which does not result in a Disqualification .
 ● Major Violation - A Violation which results in a Disqualification .
 ● Match Affecting - A Violation which changes the winning and losing Alliance in the Match.
 ● CoC-related Violation - A Violation of a rule that relates to the RECF Code of Conduct and related pro -
cesses. The included rules are: <S2>, <G1>, <G2>, <G4>, <G5>, <R1>, and Major Violations of <S1>.
Win Percentage (WP) - Replaces Win Points in a league event. Win Percentage is calculated by the number 
of wins divided by the number of Qualification Matches  the Team plays. In cases of a tie, the Team is given a 
0.5 number of “wins” for that Match. The Autonomous Win Point is also considered 0.5 “wins,” added to the 
total number of wins.
Win Points (WP)  - The first basis of ranking Teams. Teams will receive zero (0), one (1), two (2), or three (3) 
Win Points for each Qualification Match . Unless a Team is Disqualified, both Teams on an Alliance always 
earn the same number of Win Points.
 ● One (1) Win Point is awarded for completing the Autonomous Win Point task(s).
 ● Two (2) Win Points are awarded for winning a Qualification Match .
 ● One (1) Win Point is awarded for tying a Qualification Match .
 ● Zero (0) Win Points are awarded for losing a Qualification Match .

--- PAGE 123 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Appendix C
Rule Violations

--- PAGE 124 ---

C2
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
This appendix is intended to provide additional guidance regarding rule Violations within the VEX V5 
Robotics Competition, and offer further explanation on how Violations may be interpreted and enforced 
during Matches. It is designed to promote consistency in officiating and to help Teams better understand 
how actions on the Field may impact scoring, Match outcomes, and referee decisions.
All Violation Notes to denote special circumstances or provide additional clarifications have been consol -
idated into this section such that they may be easily referenced. If no Violation Notes are found in a given 
rule, then it should be assumed that the below “default” definitions apply.  
 
This appendix does not supersede any existing rule, but instead serves as a secondary resource to aid in 
their application.
Violation - The act of breaking a rule in the Game Manual.
 ● Minor Violation - A Violation which does not result in a Disqualification .
 ० Accidental, momentary, or otherwise non Match Affecting Violations are usually Minor Violations .
 ० Minor Violations  usually result in a verbal notification from the Head Referee during the Match, which 
should serve to inform the Team that a rule is being Violated before it escalates to a Major Violation.
 ● Major Violation - A Violation which results in a Disqualification .
 ० Unless otherwise noted in a rule, all Match Affecting Violations are Major Violations.
 ० If noted in the rule, egregious or strategic Violations or intentional actions that result in Violations 
may also be Major Violations.
 ० Multiple Minor Violations within a Match or Tournament may escalate to a Major Violation at the Head 
Referee’s discretion or as specified in a rule. Minor Violations  carry over into Elimination Matches  
unless otherwise specified within a rule.
 ● Match Affecting - A Violation which changes the winning and losing Alliance in the Match.
 ० Multiple Violations within a Match can cumulatively become Match Affecting.
 ० When evaluating if a Violation was Match Affecting, Head Referees will focus primarily on any Robot 
actions that were directly related to the Violation.
 ० Determining whether a Violation was Match Affecting can only be done once the Match is complete 
and the scores have been calculated.
 ० To determine whether a Violation may have been Match Affecting, check whether the Team who 
committed the Violation won or lost the Match. If they did not win the Match, then the Violation could 
not have been Match Affecting, and it was very likely a Minor Violation.
 ● CoC-related Violation - A Violation of a rule that relates to the RECF Code of Conduct and related pro -
cesses. The included rules are: <S2>, <G1>, <G2>, <G4>, <G5>, <R1>, and Major Violations of <S1>.
 ० Potential CoC-related Violations  should be brought to the attention of the Event Partner, and 
resolved through the Code of Conduct Reporting Process in coordination with the Head Referee, 
Judge Advisor, and RECF Regional Support Manager . Follow-up investigations are conducted by the 
RECF Rules & Conduct Committee (RCC). Penalties for confirmed CoC-related Violations  can range 
from single-Match Disqualifications  to removal from the program.
Appendix C - Rule Violations

--- PAGE 125 ---

C3
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Figure V-1: The process for handling Violations during Robot inspection.
See the flowcharts in figures V-1, V-2, and V-3 for more information, and this article for full details of the 
event CoC process.

--- PAGE 126 ---

C4
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Figure V-2: The process for determining whether or not a game play infraction should result in a Major Violation  or Minor Violation .

--- PAGE 127 ---

C5
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Figure V-3: The process for handling CoC-related Violations .

--- PAGE 128 ---

C6
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<SG1>
1. The Match will not begin with any conditions in this rule unmet. If a Robot cannot meet these conditions 
in a timely manner, the Robot will be removed from the Field and rules <R2d> and <GG2> will apply until 
the situation is corrected. They will not receive a Disqualification , but should receive a Minor Violation 
and will not be permitted to play in the Match.
<SG2>
1. Incidental/insignificant infractions that occur during a Match are only considered Minor Violations . 
Repeated Minor Violations  should only escalate to a Major Violation in extreme circumstances. 
Examples of Minor Violations  include, but are not limited to:
 ० Loose wires
 ० Broken zip ties / rubber bands
 ० Bent or broken mechanical components that are not used for strategic gain
 
<SG4>
1. After a Team’s third Match with any Violation of this rule (either Major or Minor), all subsequent Viola-
tions of this rule will immediately escalate to a Major Violation.
2. Any Team that removes three (3) or more Scoring Objects from the Field in a single Match will receive a 
Major Violation.
3. If it is not clear which Robot was the last to contact the Scoring Object, all involved Teams with a color 
that is opposite to the Scoring Object will receive a Violation.                     
4. Due to the difficulty of determining Match Affecting implications of this rule, most Violations should 
be considered Minor. However, blatantly intentional and/or Match Affecting Violations (especially 
during Elimination Matches ) may still immediately escalate to a Major Violation at the Head Referee’s 
discretion.
 
<SG5>
1. See <SG1>.
<SG7>
1. All Violations of this rule (Major or Minor) will result in the Autonomous Bonus being awarded to the 
opposing Alliance. See <SG8b> for a potential exception caused by Autonomous Line interactions.
2. Intentional, strategic, or egregious Violations, such as intentional contact with an opposing Robot while 
contacting the foam tiles on the opposing side of the Autonomous Line, or the interactions described in 
<SG7e> will be considered Major Violations and should result in a Disqualification  for the Match.
Specific Game Rules
Violation Notes by Rule

--- PAGE 129 ---

C7
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
3. Deliberate Defensive Autonomous strategies, as described in <SG7a>, may also be recorded as <G1> 
Violations at the Head Referee’s discretion.
 
<SG9>
1. Incidental contact with an opposing Alliance-colored Goal and/or Scoring Objects Placed in that Goal 
will be considered a Minor Violation.
2. All other interactions with an opposing Alliance-colored Goal, including the addition or removal of 
Scoring Objects, will be considered a Major Violation.
<SG10>
a. Violations should be considered Match Affecting if the offending Team’s Alliance ties or wins the Match 
by 15 points or less.
b. Any Violations the Head Referee deems to be intentional and/or egregious will be considered Major 
Violations.
c. For the purposes of this rule, the following guidelines should be used to escalate repeated Minor Viola-
tions to a Major Violation in Qualification Matches  and Elimination Matches :
i. Two or more Violations by a Team in a single Match.
ii. Three or more Matches with at least one Violation by a Team (i.e., the third Match and all subsequent 
Matches with a Violation).
 
<SG11>
1. For the purposes of Match Affecting calculations, each illegal Match Load should be considered worth 
a value of 3 points. These values are not added to the actual score. If subtracting 3 points per illegal 
Match Load from the offending Alliance’s final score would change the outcome of the Match, then the 
<SG11> Violation should be considered Match Affecting.
2. For the purposes of this rule, the following guidelines should be used for escalating repeated Minor 
Violations to a Major Violation during Qualification Matches :
a. Six or more illegal Match Loads in a single Qualification Match .
b. Three or more Qualification Matches  with at least one illegal Match Load (i.e., the third Match and all 
subsequent Matches with a Violation).
3. For the purposes of this rule, only Match Affecting Violations should be considered during Elimination 
Matches (i.e., repeated Minor Violations  in Elimination Matches  do not compound to Major Violations).
a. Point 2a does not explicitly apply during Elimination Matches , although the risk of illegal Match Load 
becoming Match Affecting still inherently increases as the quantity of Match Loads increases.
b. Point 2b does not apply during Elimination Matches .

--- PAGE 130 ---

C8
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<G1>
1. Any Violation of <G1> may be considered a Major Violation and should be addressed on a case-by-case 
basis. Teams at risk of a <G1> Major Violation due to multiple disrespectful or uncivil behaviors will 
usually receive a “final warning”, although the Head Referee is not required to provide one. All <G1> 
Major Violations /Disqualifications   should be handled through the CoC-related Violation process (see 
figure V-3).
<G2>
1. Potential Violations of this rule will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. By definition, all Violations 
of this rule become Match Affecting as soon as a Robot which was built or programmed by an Adult 
scores points in a Match. All reported and/or suspected <G2> Violations should be handled through the 
CoC-related Violation process (see figure V-3).
 
<G4>
1. Teams believed to be in Violation of this rule should be reported to the Judge Advisor, Head Referee, 
or Event Partner for further investigation in coordination with the Regional Support Manager . Based on 
the investigation the Team may be removed from further Matches, have their Robot Skills Match scores 
removed, and/or be removed from consideration from judged awards.
2. Violations of this rule will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, in tandem with the RECF Student 
Centered Policy as noted in <G2>, and the REC Foundation Code of Conduct as noted in <G1>. All 
reported and/or suspected <G4> Violations should be handled through the CoC-related Violation 
process (see figure V-3).
 
<G5>
1. Teams believed to be in Violation of this rule should be handled through the CoC-related Violation 
process (see figure V-3). 
<G6>
1. A Team that circumvents a Robot rule for a competitive advantage should receive an immediate 
Disqualification  for the current Match. In addition to the immediate Match Disqualification , all <G6> 
Violations should begin the CoC-related Violation process (see figure V-3).
General Rules
Safety Rules
<S1>
1. Major Violations should be handled through the CoC-related Violation process (see figure V-3). 
<S2>
1. <S2> Violations should be handled through the CoC-related Violation process (see figure V-3).

--- PAGE 131 ---

C9
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
<GG1>
1. Major Violations of this rule are not required to be Match Affecting, and could invoke Violations of other 
rules, such as <G1>, <G2>, or <G4>.
<GG8>
1. Major Violations of this rule should be rare, as Robots should never be designed to intentionally violate 
it. Minor Violations  are usually due to Robots being damaged during gameplay, such as a wheel falling 
off.
 
<GG11>
1. The intent of this rule is to ensure that Robots abide by commands sent by the tournament software. 
Temporarily removing the cable to assist with mid- Match troubleshooting, with an Event Partner or 
other event technical staff present and assisting, would not be considered a Violation.
 
<GG12>
1. See <GG13>. 
<GG13>
1. In general, Minor Violations  of SG rules that occur during the Autonomous Period should only affect 
the outcome of the Autonomous Period (i.e., the Alliance can’t win the Autonomous Bonus or earn an 
Autonomous Win Point ) and should not be considered when determining whether a Violation has been 
repeated during the event.
2. If a Head Referee determines that a Violation of an SG or GG rule during the Autonomous Period was 
intentional/strategic rather than accidental/situational, it should be recorded as a Minor Violation or 
Major Violation and considered when determining whether a Violation has been repeated during the 
event.
<GG14>
1. Major Violations of this rule are not required to be Match Affecting. Intentional and/or egregious tipping, 
Entanglement, or damage may be considered a Major Violation at the Head Referee’s discretion.
2. Repeated Violations within a Match or Tournament could be considered a Violation of <G1> and/or <S1> 
at the Head Referee’s discretion.
<GG16>
1. In most cases, if a Team causes their opponent to break a rule, the Head Referee will simply not enforce 
the penalty on that opponent, and it will be considered a Minor Violation for the Team that forced a 
Violation. However, if the forced situation becomes Match Affecting in favor of the Team that forced the 
Violation, it will be considered a Major Violation for the Team that forced the Violation.
General Game Rules

--- PAGE 132 ---

VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
C10
<R1>
1.  Major Violations should be handled through the CoC-related Violation process (see figure V-3).
<R24>
1.  Teams must replace broken plastic pieces that result in temporary, unintentional <R24>  Violations.
Robot Rules
<GG17>
1.  When determining whether a Holding Violation was Match Affecting, they should consider the full 
context of the Match and both Robots’ actions, including the following. Because the first three seconds 
of a Hold are legal game play and not a Violation, only the extended portion of a Hold should be consid -
ered. Holding is an inherently Defensive action, so rule <GG15>  may also be considered if a judgment 
call is required.
 ० How much extra time was included in the Holding interaction
 ० How long the Robots were separated if the Holding Robot backs away and returns too early
 ० What both Robots were doing within the larger context of the Match

--- PAGE 133 ---

Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Appendix D
Team Classifications and Student Roles

--- PAGE 134 ---

D2
VEX V5 Robotics Competition Override - Game Manual
Copyright 2026, VEX Robotics Inc.
Version 0.1 - Released April 27, 2026
Appendix D - Team Classifications and Student Roles
Three or more Students make up a Team. To participate in an official VEX V5 Robotics Competition event, a 
Team must first register on RobotEvents.com and receive a VEX V5 Robotics Competition Team number. A 
Team’s unique number identifies their organization and their Team within that organization. Each Team must 
design and build their own Robot, create their own code, develop their own strategies to play the game, and 
maintain their own engineering notebook if they choose to use one.
 ● A Team is classified as a Middle School Team if all members are Middle School Students.
 ● A Team is classified as a High School Team if any of its members are High School Students, or if the 
Team is made up of Middle School Students who declare themselves “playing up” as High School 
Students by registering their Team as a High School Team.
 ● Once a Team has competed in an event as a High School Team, that Team may not change back to a 
Middle School Team for the remainder of the season. If a Team mistakenly registers as a Middle School 
Team but is ineligible for that age group, their registration may be revised mid-season with Regional 
Support Manager  assistance; all prior qualifications for the season will be lost.
 ● Teams may be associated with schools, community/youth organizations, or groups of neighborhood 
Students.
In the context of this Game Manual, Student Team members fill multiple roles related to Robot design, build, 
coding, strategy, and documentation. See <G2>, <G4>, <G5> for more information. Adults may not fulfill any 
of these roles.
 ● Designer - Any Student Team member who helps design the Robot to be built for competition. Adults 
are permitted to teach Designers associated concepts, but should never work on the design of the 
Robot.
 ● Builder - Any Student Team member who helps build the Robot. Adults are permitted to teach Builders 
associated concepts, but should never work on the Robot.
 ● Coder - Any Student Team member who contributes to the computer code that is downloaded onto the 
Robot. Adults are permitted to teach Coders associated concepts, but should never work on the code 
that goes on the Robot.
 ● Strategist - Any Student Team member who contributes to the Match strategies used to score points 
during a Qualification Match  or Robot Skills Match, including assessing the impact of other Teams’ 
performance and strategies on the Team’s strategy (e.g., scouting). Adults are permitted to teach Strat-
egists associated concepts, but should never create or dictate a Team’s Match strategy.
 ● Notebooker - Any Student Team member who contributes to the Team’s engineering notebook or 
associated documentation. Adults are permitted to teach Notebookers associated concepts, but 
should never work on the engineering notebook or other documentation.

